Eosinophilic oesophagitis
Eosinophilic oesophagitis
Eosinophilic oesophagitis is characterised by an allergic inflammation of the oesophagus. An oesophageal biopsy will show dense infiltrate of eosinophils in the epithelium. Although this disease is relatively poorly understood, it is thought to be caused by an allergic reaction to ingested food. The resulting oesophageal inflammation results in pain and
dysphagia
, amongst other symptoms.
Last updated: 1
st
January 2025
Epidemiology
Incidence: 9.00 cases per 100,000 person-years
Peak incidence: 30-40 years
Sex ratio: more common in males 2.5:1
<1
1-5
6+
16+
30+
40+
50+
60+
70+
80+
Aetiology
Risk factors for developing eosinophilic oesophagitis:
Allergies/ asthma: suffering from food/ environmental allergies or atopic dermatitis and asthma increases the risk of diagnosis
Male sex
Family history of eosinophilic oesophagitis or allergies
Caucasian race
Age between 30-50
Coexisting autoimmune disease e.g. coeliac disease
Improve
Clinical features
Patients typically present with a subacute onset of:
In children, disease presents with failure to thrive due to food refusal
Adults often experience
dysphagia
, strictures/ fibrosis (56%), food impaction (55%), regurgitation/
vomiting
, anorexia
Signs:
Signs are minimal and suspicion of this diagnosis relies mainly on the reported symptoms, past medical history and exclusion of other differential diagnoses e.g. GORD
Weight loss
Improve
Investigations
Investigations:
Endoscopy: diagnosis can only be made on the histological analysis of an oesophageal biopsy. There must be more than 15 eosinophils per high power microscopy field to diagnose the condition. Other findings on endoscopy include reduced vasculature, thick mucosa, mucosal furrows, strictures and laryngeal oedema. Histologically, the diagnosis is made more likely in the presence of epithelial desquamation, eosinophilic microabscesses, and abnormally long papillae
PPI trial: persistence of
eosinophilia
and no improvement of symptoms after trialling a proton pump inhibitor. This can help the clinician differentiate between eosinophilic oesophagitis and GORD, which can be a tricky task
Improve
Management
As eosinophilic oesophagitis is a relatively little-known condition that is still widely misunderstood, it is recommended that patients are referred to a gastroenterologist to receive specialist care.
Management:
- Dietary modification: This is both effective in adults and children. There are three methods available to begin excluding food from the diet. The elemental diet (involves taking an amino acid mixture for six weeks), exclusion of six food groups (involves avoiding foods commonly associated with allergy e.g. nuts, soy, egg, seafood), and the targeted elimination diet (involves excluding foods that have been identified as allergy-triggering during allergy testing). It is important to involve a dietitian when attempting to modify diet.
Topical steroids e.g. fluticasone and budesonide are options when dietary modification fails. This requires the patient to swallow solutions of the steroid to line the oesophagus. This should be done for eight weeks before being reassessed
Oesophageal dilatation: 56% of patients require this at some point in their treatment to reduce the symptoms associated with oesophageal strictures
Improve
Complications
Eosinophilic oesophagitis (EoE) can lead to several significant complications if left untreated or inadequately managed:
Oesophageal strictures
- chronic inflammation leads to fibrosis and narrowing of the oesophageal lumen
Progressive stricture formation is the most common complication, occurring in up to 70% of untreated adults with long-standing disease
Strictures typically develop in the proximal and mid-oesophagus, unlike GORD-related strictures which affect the distal oesophagus
Food impaction
- acute obstruction of the oesophagus requiring emergency intervention
Occurs in approximately 30-55% of patients with EoE
May be the presenting symptom that leads to diagnosis
Repeated episodes increase risk of oesophageal perforation
Oesophageal perforation
Rare but serious complication
May occur spontaneously or during endoscopic procedures, particularly dilatation
Risk is increased in patients with severe inflammation and fibrosis
Nutritional deficiencies
Secondary to dietary restrictions and food avoidance behaviours
More common in children and patients on extensive elimination diets
May include deficiencies in calcium, vitamin D, iron, and protein
Psychological impact
Anxiety around eating, particularly in social settings
Reduced quality of life due to chronic symptoms and dietary restrictions
Depression reported in up to 40% of adults with EoE
Disease Progression
Natural history typically follows an inflammatory-to-fibrostenotic progression
Early disease characterised by inflammatory changes and symptoms of
dysphagia
Later disease marked by fibrosis, strictures and food impaction
British Society of
Gastroenterology
(BSG) guidelines
recognise this progression pattern as a rationale for early intervention
Risk factors for rapid progression
Delayed diagnosis
Poor adherence to therapy
Male sex
Older age at diagnosis
Long-term Sequelae
Barrett's oesophagus
Association remains controversial but some studies suggest increased risk
Regular endoscopic surveillance may be warranted in patients with long-standing disease
Impact on growth and development in children
Growth failure in paediatric patients with untreated disease
Developmental issues related to feeding difficulties and nutritional deficiencies
Refractory disease
Approximately 10-15% of patients develop resistance to conventional therapies
May require combination treatments or experimental approaches
Improve
Prognosis
Prognosis:
Eosinophilic oesophagitis is a chronic condition. It is recognised that this condition is likely to come back in patients that stop treatment so it important to gain a good balance of dietary modifications and additional pharmacological treatments when necessary.
Improve
Gastroenterology
Eosinophilic oesophagitis