Non-alcoholic fatty liver disease
Non-alcoholic fatty liver disease
Non-alcoholic fatty liver disease (NAFLD) is a common condition characterized by the accumulation of fat in the liver. It is closely associated with obesity, insulin resistance, and metabolic syndrome. NAFLD can progress to non-alcoholic steatohepatitis (NASH), which is a more severe form of the disease that can lead to
cirrhosis
, liver failure, and hepatocellular carcinoma. The diagnosis of NAFLD is based on imaging studies and elevated liver enzymes, while the diagnosis of NASH requires a liver biopsy. Management of NAFLD involves lifestyle modifications such as weight loss, exercise, and a healthy diet. There are currently no approved pharmacological therapies for NAFLD or NASH, but several drugs are being investigated in clinical trials.
Last updated: 1
st
January 2025
Epidemiology
Incidence: 330.00 cases per 100,000 person-years
Peak incidence: 50-60 years
Sex ratio: more common in males 3:1
Condition
Relative
incidence
Non-alcoholic fatty liver disease
1
Alcoholic liver disease
0.06
Haemochromatosis
0.004
Autoimmune hepatitis
0.003
<1
1-5
6+
16+
30+
40+
50+
60+
70+
80+
Clinical features
Clinical features
Most patients with NAFLD are asymptomatic and the condition is often discovered incidentally during routine blood tests or imaging studies.
Some patients may present with non-specific symptoms such as:
fatigue
malaise
right upper quadrant discomfort.
Patients with NAFLD are at increased risk of developing metabolic syndrome, type 2 diabetes mellitus, and cardiovascular disease.
Improve
Investigations
NICE produced guidelines on the investigation and management of NAFLD in 2016. Key points:
there is no evidence to support screening for NAFLD in adults, even in at risk groups (e.g. type 2 diabetes)
the guidelines are therefore based on the management of the
incidental
finding of NAFLD - typically asymptomatic fatty changes on liver ultrasound
in these patients, NICE recommends the use of the enhanced liver fibrosis (ELF) blood test to check for advanced fibrosis
the ELF blood test is a combination of hyaluronic acid + procollagen III + tissue inhibitor of metalloproteinase 1. An algorithm based on these values results in an ELF blood test score, similar to triple testing for Down's syndrome
An excellent review by Byrne et Al in 2018 reviewed the diagnosis and monitoring of NAFLD. It made the following suggestions if the ELF blood test was not available:
non-invasive tests may be used to assess the severity of fibrosis
these include the FIB4 score or NALFD fibrosis score
these scores may be used in combination with a FibroScan (liver stiffness measurement assessed with transient elastography)
this combination has been shown to have excellent accuracy in predicting fibrosis
Patients who are likely to have advanced fibrosis should be referred to a liver specialist. They will then likely have a liver biopsy to stage the disease more accurately.
Improve
Management
Management
the mainstay of treatment is lifestyle changes (particularly weight loss) and monitoring
there is ongoing research into the role of gastric banding and insulin-sensitising drugs (e.g. metformin, pioglitazone)
Improve
References
NICE - 2016 Non-alcoholic fatty liver disease (NAFLD): assessment and management
Gastroenterology
Non-alcoholic fatty liver disease