Peptic ulcer disease
Peptic ulcer disease
Peptic ulcer disease may be defined as ulceration in the stomach or duodenum. It is worth remembering that many patients are managed with the clinical diagnosis of 'dyspepsia' as opposed to the endoscopic diagnosis of peptic ulcer disease.
Last updated: 1
st
January 2025
Epidemiology
Incidence: 75.00 cases per 100,000 person-years
Peak incidence: 40-50 years
Sex ratio: more common in males 1.3:1
Condition
Relative
incidence
Gastro-oesophageal reflux disease
66.67
Peptic ulcer disease
1
<1
1-5
6+
16+
30+
40+
50+
60+
70+
80+
Aetiology
Risk factors
Helicobacter pylori
is associated with the majority of peptic ulcers:
95% of duodenal ulcers
75% of gastric ulcers
drugs:
NSAIDs
SSRIs
corticosteroids
bisphosphonates
Zollinger-Ellison syndrome: rare cause characterised by excessive levels of gastrin, usually from a gastrin secreting tumour
the role of alcohol and smoking is not clear
Improve
Pathophysiology
In peptic ulcer disease there is an imbalance between protective factors (e.g. mucous production, blood flow) and factors that promote damage (e.g.
Helicobacter pylori
, gastric acid).
Improve
Clinical features
Features
epigastric pain
nausea
duodenal ulcers
more common than gastric ulcers
epigastric pain when hungry, relieved by eating
gastric ulcers
epigastric pain worsened by eating
Improve
Investigations
Investigation
Helicobacter pylori
should be tested for
either a Urea breath test or stool antigen test should be used first-line
Improve
Differential diagnosis
When considering the differential diagnosis of peptic ulcer disease (PUD), it is essential to consider other gastrointestinal conditions that may present similarly. The three most likely alternative diagnoses include gastroesophageal reflux disease (
GERD
), gastritis, and gastric cancer.
Gastroesophageal Reflux Disease (GERD)
Clinical presentation:
GERD typically presents with heartburn, regurgitation, and dysphagia. These symptoms are often exacerbated by lying flat, bending over or after meals. Night-time symptoms and respiratory symptoms such as cough or hoarseness can also occur.
Comparison with PUD:
Unlike PUD, pain associated with GERD does not usually follow a pattern and is not relieved by eating. Also, GERD patients may experience a sour taste in the mouth due to regurgitation of stomach acid which is not a typical symptom in PUD.
Gastritis
Clinical presentation:
Gastritis can be asymptomatic or present with upper abdominal discomfort or pain,
nausea
,
vomiting
and sometimes loss of appetite. In severe cases, patients may present with haematemesis or melena.
Comparison with PUD:
The
epigastric pain
experienced in gastritis is often described as a burning sensation similar to PUD but tends to be more diffuse and less likely to radiate to the back. Additionally, while both conditions can cause
nausea and vomiting
, these symptoms are more common in gastritis than in PUD.
Gastric Cancer
Clinical presentation:
Gastric cancer often presents late in its course with non-specific symptoms such as weight loss, persistent abdominal pain, dysphagia, and anorexia. In advanced stages, it can present with palpable abdominal mass or ascites.
Comparison with PUD:
The pain of gastric cancer is often more constant and less likely to be relieved by antacids than that of PUD. Furthermore, alarm symptoms such as weight loss and persistent vomiting are more suggestive of malignancy than PUD.
Improve
Management
Management
if
Helicobacter pylori
is negative then
proton pump inhibitors
(PPIs) should be given until the ulcer is healed
if
Helicobacter pylori
is positive then eradication therapy should be given
Improve
Complications
-
perforated peptic ulcer
bleeding peptic ulcer
Improve
Gastroenterology
Peptic ulcer disease