Myelodysplastic syndrome
Myelodysplastic syndrome
Myelodysplastic syndrome (MDS), also known as myelodysplasia, describes a group of haematological disorders in which the bone marrow functions abnormally and there is abnormal growth of pluripotent stem cells in the bone marrow. This, in turn, causes insufficiency in the numbers of mature blood cells, which may affect one or several cell lines - red blood cells (RBCs), white blood cells (WBCs) and/or platelets. Importantly, 30% of patients with MDS eventually progress to
acute myeloid leukaemia
(AML).
Last updated: 3
rd
September 2023
Epidemiology
Incidence: 3.00 cases per 100,000 person-years
Peak incidence: 70+ years
Sex ratio: more common in males 1.6:1
Condition
Relative
incidence
Myeloma
3.33
Acute myeloid leukaemia
1.67
Myelodysplastic syndrome
1
Chronic myeloid leukaemia
0.33
Myelofibrosis
0.13
<1
1-5
6+
16+
30+
40+
50+
60+
70+
80+
Aetiology
MDS may occur with, or more commonly, with an underlying disorder.
Primary MDS (90%)
Risk factors include:
Male sex
Caucasian
Age >60 years
Secondary (10%)
Therapy-related
Occurs on average 2-10 years after chemotherapy for other cancers
Due to the DNA-damaging effects on the the bone marrow
The risk is higher in patients treated for breast cancer, leukaemias, lymphomas, head and neck, GI, lung and prostate cancer.
Patients may have more complex chromosomal abnormalities
Radiotherapy-related
Similar as for chemotherapy, this is a late adverse effect of treatment due to irradiation of the bone marrow
Improve
Pathophysiology
- MDS occurs due to a failure of one, two or all three main cell lines in the bone marrow, usually at the stem cell level.
These cell lines are erythrocytic (giving rise to RBCs), granulocytic (most WBCs) and megakaryocytic (platelets).
MDS is therefore an umbrella term for a a quite heterogeneous group of disorders that occur due to different cytogenetic events, such as 5q deletion in the MDS-5q deletion subtype.
RBCs, WBCs and platelets may all be affected by MDS, resulting in potentially life-threatening disease due to
anaemia
, increased risk of bleeding and infections.
Additional genetic abnormalities can hence result in the transformation of MDS into
acute myeloid leukaemia
(AML).
Improve
Classification
The WHO classification of MDS was updated in 2016. It takes into account which cell lines are affected by cytopenia; blood and bone marrow blast proportion; which myeloid cell lineages exhibit dysplastic changes in 10% of cells; presence of ring sideroblasts, erythroid precursors, Auer rods; and to an extent, karyotype and molecular genetic findings. The following list is not exhaustive, but lists the most important categories:
MDS with single lineage dysplasia (MDS-SLD)
MDS with multi-lineage dysplasia (MDS-MLD)
MDS with ring sideroblasts (MDS-RS)
MDS with excess blasts (MDS-EB)
MDS with isolated del(5q)
A specific subtype that is amenable to treatment with a mediation called lenalidomide.
Unclassifiable MDS (MDS-U)
Other classification systems include the International Prognostic Scoring System (IPSS) and French-American-British (FAB) system.
Improve
Clinical features
MDS is asymptomatic in 20% and often picked up incidentally following blood tests.
If symptomatic, features may be non-specific, such as recurrent infections.
Generally, the symptoms depend on the cell line affected:
Anaemia
Fatigue
Weakness
Breathlessness
Pallor
Leukocytopaenia
Recurrent infections, especially bacterial infections of the skin
Thrombocytopaenia
Easy bruising, e.g. petechiae
Recurrent bleeding, e.g. recurrent nosebleeds
Hepatosplenomegaly is uncommon, but may occur due to extramedullary haematopoiesis (blood cell production in other places than the bone marrow in an attempt to compensate for cytopaenia)
Improve
Investigations
In MDS, the blood tests and peripheral blood film usually pick up significant abnormalities:
Bloods
Low RBC, WBC and/or platelets
Neutropaenia is often severe
Peripheral blood film
Nucleated RBCs
Ringed sideroblasts
Howell-Jolly bodies
Basophilic stippling
Hypolobulated or unlobulated neutrophil nuclei
Large, agranular platelets and megakaryocytes
Once these initial tests support the suspicion of MDS, the following investigations are performed:
Bone marrow biopsy (diagnostic)
Hyp
ER
cellular, dysplastic bone marrow with numerous cells of all three cell lines
Blasts, megakaryotes, ringed sideroblasts, etc.
Cytogenetic studies (indicated in all patients with suspected MDS having a bone marrow examination according to the British Society for
Haematology
)
Common clonal changes are 5q deletion (5q-), monosomy 7 (-7 or 7q-), trisomy 8 (+8)
Generally, most single genetic abnormalities indicate a good prognosis.
This also identifies patients with a 5q deletion who respond to treatment with lenalidomide.
Improve
Differential diagnosis
The diagnosis of Myelodysplastic Syndrome (MDS) poses a clinical challenge due to its heterogeneous presentation. Here, we explore three common conditions that should be considered in the differential diagnosis: vitamin B12 and folate deficiency, aplastic
anaemia
, and chronic myelomonocytic leukaemia (CMML).
Vitamin B12 and Folate Deficiency
Comparison
-
Clinical Presentation
: Both conditions may present with macrocytic anaemia,
fatigue
, and weakness.
-
Peripheral Smear
: Hypersegmented neutrophils may be present in both conditions.
Contrast
-
Laboratory Findings
: Vitamin B12 and folate deficiencies typically display low serum levels of the respective vitamins, which is not the case in MDS.
-
Response to Treatment
: Anaemia and cytopenias generally respond well to vitamin replacement, whereas the response in MDS is less predictable.
Aplastic Anaemia
Comparison
-
Clinical Presentation
: Both conditions may present with symptoms of anaemia,
thrombocytopenia
, and neutropenia such as fatigue, easy bruising, and susceptibility to infections.
-
Bone Marrow
: Hypocellular bone marrow can be a feature in both conditions.
Contrast
-
Bone Marrow Findings
: Aplastic anaemia is characterised by marrow hypoplasia without dysplasia, unlike MDS where dysplasia is a hallmark.
-
Etiology
: Aplastic anaemia often has an autoimmune or toxic exposure history, which is usually not the case in MDS.
Chronic Myelomonocytic Leukaemia (CMML)
Comparison
-
Clinical Presentation
: Both MDS and CMML may present with anaemia, thrombocytopenia, and an elevated white blood cell count.
-
Cytogenetic Abnormalities
: Both conditions may display chromosomal abnormalities.
Contrast
-
Peripheral Smear
: CMML typically shows increased monocytes, which is not a consistent feature in MDS.
-
Bone Marrow Findings
: CMML often has a more proliferative bone marrow picture, with both dysplasia and hypercellularity.
Improve
Management
The following is based on the British Society for
Haematology
guidelines for the diagnosis and management of adult myelodysplastic syndromes (https://doi.org/10.1111/bjh.12694).
The mainstay of treatment is supportive care:
Blood transfusions, especially RBC transfusions, based on an individualised haemoglobin cut-off
Iron chelation therapy in transfusion iron overload (only for patients with good prognosis and certain subtypes), e.g. desferrioxamine, deferasirox
Erythroid-stimulating agents (ESA) to relieve
anaemia
Antibiotics for recurrent infections
Further therapy may involve the following, depending on the patient's subtype, prognosis, and general health:
Medical treatment
Antithymocyte globulin (ATG) as immunosuppressant therapy (for younger patients with normal karyotype)
Lenalidomide (for patients with del(5q) subtype)
Azacitidine (hypomethyalting agent approved by NICE in 2011 for intermediate and high-risk MDS)
Allogenous stem cell (bone marrow) transplant
This is the only curative treatment option
The patient's eligibility depends on type (for high-risk MDS) and general health; it should not depend on the age, but more on comorbidities and performance status.
Improve
Complications
Complications overlap with its features, but can be life-threatening:
Bleeding (due to thrombocytopaenia)
Risk of life-threatening haemorrhage
E.g. intracranial, pulmonary, gastrointestinal
Infections (due to leukocytopaenia)
Atypical infections
Neutropaenic sepsis
Progression to AML
Any of the above are more likely to occur once the disease progresses to AML, i.e. bleeding and infection
30% of patients with MDS progress to AML
Groups at highest risk of transformation are MDS-EB, MDS-RS-MLD, MDS-MLD
Also consider treatment-related complications:
Complications of chemotherapy
Azacitidine: fever, N+V, diarrhoea or constipation,
fatigue
and weakness
Lenalidomide: leukocytopaenia, thrombocytopaenia, diarrhoea or constipation, fatigue and weakness
Cytarabine (for patients progressed to AML): hair loss, mouth sores, loss of appetite, N+V, pancytopaenia
Complications of allogeneic bone marrow transplant
Early side effects: bleeding, infection, pancytopaenia
Late side effects: graft-versus-host disease (GVHD), recurrence
The overall recurrence rate following allogeneic transplantation is estimated to be 20-50%.
Improve
Prognosis
- Median survival is about 5 years, but varies with subtype and risk group (e.g. International Prognostic Scoring System risk groups).
30% progress to
acute myeloid leukaemia
(AML).
This risk is higher with certain subtypes and findings in the bone marrow. You do not need to know the details here, again, but the principles are easy to understand.
Presence of ringed sideroblasts = protective; in a UK-based study (Roman et al., 2016), only 5% progressed to AML.
Presence of excess blasts (6-20% myeloblasts) = higher risk; 25% progressed to AML (Roman et al., 2016).
Improve
Haematology
Myelodysplastic syndrome