Ludwig's angina
Ludwig's angina
Ludwig's angina is a type of progressive cellulitis that invades the floor of the mouth and soft tissues of the neck. Most cases result from odontogenic infections which spread into the submandibular space.
It is a life-threatening emergency as airway obstruction can occur rapidly as a result. Urgent medical treatment and airway assessment is required.
Last updated: 1
st
January 2025
Epidemiology
Incidence: 0.50 cases per 100,000 person-years
Peak incidence: 40-50 years
Sex ratio: 1:1
Condition
Relative
incidence
Peritonsillar abscess (quinsy)
60.00
Ludwig's angina
1
<1
1-5
6+
16+
30+
40+
50+
60+
70+
80+
Aetiology
Over 70% of cases occur as a result of
dental infections
, particularly from the second or third mandibular molars. Less common causes include:
Peritonsillar abscesses
Mandibular fractures
Oral lacerations/piercings
Sialadenitis
Oral malignancy
Predisposing factors include:
Dental cavities
Previous dental procedures
Systemic conditions:
Diabetes mellitus
Malnutrition
Alcoholism
AIDS
Other immunosuppressive conditions
Improve
Pathophysiology
Ludwig's angina occurs when infection from a nearby source spreads contiguously into the sublingual and
submandibular space
. It can then progress rapidly and travel to the parapharyngeal and retropharyngeal spaces, encircling the airway.
Infections are typically polymicrobial and can involve various species of oral flora which arise from odontogenic sources. The most commonly isolated pathogens are:
Streptococcus viridans
Staphylococcus aureus
Staphylococcus epidermidis
Peptostreptococcus spp.
Bacteroides spp.
Fusobacterium spp.
In immunocompromised patients gram negative aerobes such as
Pseudomonas aeruginosa
may also be involved.
Improve
Clinical features
Most patients report
neck swelling
often with either dental pain or following a recent dental procedure. Clinical features can evolve rapidly as the infection spreads and other potential symptoms include:
Dysphagia
(35%)
Pharyngodynia (25%)
Fever
(25%)
Trismus (15%)
Dysphonia (15%)
Signs on physical examination include:
Bilateral submandibular swelling
Elevated or protruding tongue
Signs of
respiratory distress
if airway compromise is already present
Dyspnoea (15%)
Tachypnoea
Stridor
Improve
Investigations
Ludwig's angina is a clinical diagnosis and investigations should not delay initial management. However, the following bloods should be taken:
FBC
Leukocytosis
CRP
Blood cultures
To assess for haematogenous spread
Microbial culture and analysis can be attempted
Needle aspiration of submandibular space
Often unsuccessful in the absence of abscess formation.
It may also be useful to obtain imaging:
CT scan with IV contrast
To identify suppurative complications that require surgical drainage or if the diagnosis is unclear.
Dental X-ray
To identify the potential source of infection.
Improve
Differential diagnosis
Ludwig's angina may present similarly to other infectious neck masses and is frequently found in combination with other
deep space neck infections
. As these can all present with the similar clinical features of neck swelling,
fever
and sore throat they can often only be differentiated by the precise location of the swelling. A
CT scan
of the neck can be useful if the diagnosis is unclear. Examples include:
Peritonsillar abscess
Uvular deviation, trismus
Retropharyngeal abscess
Bulging of pharyngeal wall
Acute suppurative parotitis
Unilateral induration from cheek to jaw
It is also important to rule out non-infectious causes of neck swelling:
Oral carcinoma
Persistent oral ulcerations, cervical lymphadenopathy, weight loss?
Angioedema
History of allergies or ACE inhibitor use? Swelling and hives in other parts of the body?
Submandibular haematoma
History of trauma and anticoagulation?
Improve
Management
Initial treatment consists of urgent
airway assessment and management
combined with
broad-spectrum intravenous antibiotics
.
There are no specific guidelines for the treatment of Ludwig's angina, however, the following principles are based on retrospective studies and UpToDate recommendations:
Admission to a high dependency unit (HDU) or ENT ward with close airway observation.
If respiratory distress is present, immediate intubation or tracheostomy may be necessary.
Fibreoptic laryngoscopy is useful for airway assessment and assisting intubation.
Empiric antibiotic regimens with coverage for beta-lactamase producing gram-positive, gram-negative, and anaerobic organisms are advised. However, there are no clinical trials to date to support any particular regimen.
Options include combinations of ampicillin-sulbactam, clindamycin, and metronidazole.
If the patient is immunocompromised antibiotic treatment should be extended to involve anti-pseudomonal coverage and vancomycin should be considered if there is an increased risk of MRSA.
Antibiotics should be continued intravenously for a duration of two to three weeks.
Surgical drainage
should be performed to treat localised abscesses or following failure of medical management.
If an infected tooth is determined as the source, it should be extracted.
Improve
Complications
Airway obstruction
is the most common serious complication and can develop rapidly at any stage. It can lead to either:
Asphyxia
The most common cause of death.
Aspiration pneumonia
Other major complications in descending order of frequency include:
Septicaemia
Blood cultures should always be taken.
Mediastinitis
Due to spread through the retropharyngeal space and into the superior mediastinum.
Can be identified using a chest X-ray.
Cervical necrotizing fasciitis
Improve
Ear, nose and throat
Ludwig's angina