Autosomal dominant polycystic kidney disease
Autosomal dominant polycystic kidney disease
Autosomal dominant polycystic kidney disease (ADPKD) is the most common inherited disorder of the kidneys, affecting between 1 in 500 and 1 in 1000 people. It is characterised by the formation of renal cysts and extrarenal manifestations including hepatic cysts, intracranial aneurysms and aortic root dilatation.
Patients with ADPKD typically develop symptoms between the ages of 30 and 60, when the renal cysts are large enough to affect kidney function.
Haematuria
,
loin pain
and
hypertension
are the most common presenting symptoms.
Over 50% of patients with ADPKD will eventually develop end-stage renal disease (ESRD) requiring renal transplantation or dialysis.
Last updated: 1
st
January 2025
Epidemiology
Incidence: 2.50 cases per 100,000 person-years
Peak incidence: 30-40 years
Sex ratio: 1:1
<1
1-5
6+
16+
30+
40+
50+
60+
70+
80+
Pathophysiology
Autosomal dominant polycystic kidney disease (ADPKD) is a genetic disorder characterised by the development of numerous cysts in the kidneys. The pathogenesis involves specific mutations, aberrant cellular processes and pathological responses, leading to cyst formation and progressive renal damage.
Molecular Genetic Basis
The molecular basis for ADPKD lies primarily in mutations in two genes:
PKD1
and
PKD2
, encoding for polycystin-1 and polycystin-2 respectively. These proteins are integral components of primary cilia, which act as mechanosensors in renal tubular epithelial cells. Mutations disrupt their normal function, initiating a cascade of events that lead to cystogenesis.
Cyst Formation
The initial event is believed to be an increase in intracellular calcium concentration due to dysfunctional polycystins. This triggers activation of various signalling pathways including protein kinase C (PKC), mitogen-activated protein kinases (MAPKs) and mammalian target of rapamycin (mTOR), promoting cell proliferation and fluid secretion.
In parallel, there's disruption of planar cell polarity resulting from abnormal ciliary signalling, causing misoriented cell division. This leads to tubular dilation, setting the stage for cyst formation.
As these processes continue, the expanding cysts compress surrounding parenchyma affecting blood flow and leading to hypoxia. Hypoxia stimulates fibrogenesis via transforming growth factor-beta (TGF-β), contributing further to renal dysfunction.
Disease Progression
The disease progression in ADPKD is not solely due to genetic factors but also involves somatic second-hit mutations. These mutations cause a loss of the normal
PKD
allele in some renal tubular cells, leading to cyst formation. As the disease progresses, more second-hit events occur, resulting in an increased number and size of renal cysts.
Extrarenal Manifestations
ADPKD is also associated with several extrarenal manifestations due to similar ciliary dysfunction in other organs. These include liver and pancreatic cysts, intracranial aneurysms and cardiac valve abnormalities.
Improve
Classification
ADPKD is divided into two types based on the genetic cause:
Type 1 ADPKD:
85% of cases
Caused by a mutation in PKD1 on chromosome 16
Symptoms tend to be more severe in this type
Type 2 ADPKD:
15% of cases
Caused by a mutation in PKD2 on chromosome 4
Symptoms tend to be less severe in this type
Improve
Clinical features
Patients with ADPKD may present either with symptoms, through screening due to a positive family history, or it may be identified incidentally after abdominal imaging.
Patients with ADPKD usually develop symptoms
between the ages of 30 and 60
. Whilst both types of ADPKD have the same symptoms, they often present earlier and are more severe in type 1 ADPKD.
Typically, patients with ADPKD present with:
Haematuria
(65%): both microscopic and macroscopic haematuria are common
Loin pain
(60%): chronic loin pain may be due to distension of the renal capsule, traction of the renal pedicle, and/or hepatic enlargement. Acute loin pain may be caused by kidney stones, cyst haemorrhage and/or infection.
Hypertension
(60%)
Recurrent UTIs  (50%)
Kidney stones (20%)
Headache (10%): this may be a sign of a
ruptured berry aneurysm and subsequent subarachnoid haemorrhage
Signs on examination may include:
Palpable kidneys/abdominal mass
Hepatomegaly due to hepatic cysts
Abdominal wall hernias
These are more common in ADPKD, affecting 45% of patients
Cardiac murmur
This is due to an increased incidence of mitral valve prolapse, mitral regurgitation, aortic regurgitation and dilated aortic root in patients with ADPKD.
Symptoms of
renal failure
caused by ADPKD typically develop in the 5th decade of life and include:
Peripheral oedema
Shortness of breath
Poor appetite and weight loss
Polyuria
Pruritus
Nausea
Improve
Investigations
The investigation of ADPKD involves a combination of imaging studies, genetic testing and laboratory tests. The choice of investigations is influenced by the patient's age, family history, symptoms and renal function.
First-line Investigations:
Imaging Studies:
Renal ultrasound is the first-line imaging modality in suspected cases of ADPKD. It provides information about kidney size, number and size of cysts, presence of stones or hydronephrosis. The diagnostic criteria for ADPKD using ultrasound are age-dependent with younger patients requiring more cysts for a definitive diagnosis.
Laboratory Tests:
Serum creatinine and estimated glomerular filtration rate (eGFR) are used to assess renal function. Additionally, urinalysis can identify
haematuria
or proteinuria which may indicate disease progression.
Further Investigations:
Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI):
MRI is more sensitive than ultrasound in detecting smaller cysts and can be beneficial in equivocal cases or when assessing for complications such as cyst infection or bleeding.
Genetic Testing:
In certain situations where imaging results are inconclusive, genetic testing can be utilised to confirm the diagnosis. This involves sequencing the PKD1 and PKD2 genes responsible for most cases of ADPKD. However, due to its cost and complexity it's not routinely recommended in all patients.
Additional Laboratory Tests:
If renal function is impaired, additional tests may include serum electrolytes to check for hyperkalaemia or metabolic acidosis; complete blood count to assess for anaemia; and urate levels to evaluate for hyperuricaemia.
Imaging Studies in Detail:
The diagnosis of ADPKD is primarily based on imaging criteria. Renal ultrasound is the preferred initial modality due to its accessibility, lack of radiation exposure and ability to provide a rapid assessment of kidney size and cyst burden. The Ravine criteria are often used, which define a positive diagnosis based on the presence of a certain number of renal cysts according to age groups.
In patients younger than 30 years old, at least two unilateral or bilateral renal cysts are required. For those aged 30-59 years, at least two cysts in each kidney are necessary. In individuals aged 60 years or older, four cysts in each kidney must be present for a definitive diagnosis.
MRI can detect smaller cysts not visualised on ultrasound and provides more detailed anatomical information. It's particularly useful when assessing for complications such as cyst infection or haemorrhage.
Genetic Testing in Detail:
Genetic testing is not routinely performed in all suspected ADPKD cases due to its cost and complexity. However, it can be beneficial in specific situations such as equivocal imaging findings or when there's no family history of the disease. Genetic testing involves sequencing the PKD1 and PKD2 genes which account for approximately 85% and 15% of ADPKD cases respectively.
Improve
Differential diagnosis
There are a number of conditions which may have similar symptoms to those in ADPKD and must be considered as
important differential diagnoses
. These include:
Autosomal recessive polycystic kidney disease (ARPKD)
Similarities: both cause multiple renal cysts with or without hepatic cysts
Differences: in ARPKD symptoms present
soon after birth
and there may be no family history
Acquired cystic kidney disease
Similarities: both cause renal cysts
Differences: acquired cystic kidney disease occurs in patients with pre-existing renal disease, and kidneys are usually smaller than those affected by ADPKD
Simple renal cysts
Similarities: both cause renal cysts
Differences: simple renal cysts do not meet Ravine's criteria, they occur in the absence of a family history and are usually asymptomatic
Tuberous sclerosis
Similarities: both are autosomal dominant conditions which cause multiple renal cysts
Differences: tuberous sclerosis is characterised by the presence of other features such as facial angiofibromas, ash-leaf spots, Shagreen patches, subungual fibromas, giant cell astrocytomas and is associated with epilepsy
Von-Hippel-Lindau syndrome (VHL)
Similarities: both are genetic disorders that cause renal cysts
Differences: renal cell carcinoma is strongly associated with VHL but rare in ADPKD
Medullary cystic renal disease
Similarities: both are autosomal dominant conditions causing renal cysts
Differences: in medullary cystic renal disease the kidneys are often smaller than those affected by ADPKD, and
recurrent gout
is a common feature
Improve
Management
There is no cure for ADPKD, therefore treatment focuses on symptom control and management of complications.
In 2015
KDIGO
(Kidney Disease: Improving Global Outcomes) published recommendations for the management of ADPKD.
Referral to a nephrologist: all patients newly  diagnosed with ADPKD should be referred to a nephrologist
Blood pressure control: this should be achieved with antihypertensive medications and lifestyle modifications
Management of renal pain: underlying causes such as renal stones or cyst haemorrhage should first be excluded before starting analgesic medications
Treatment of UTIs:
This should be achieved using antibiotics according to culture and sensitivity results and local guidelines
A 7-14 day course of antibiotics is recommended
Treatment of kidney stones:
This is achieved with analgesia and appropriate surgical techniques depending on the composition and size of the stone
Management of
ESRD:
Renal transplantation is the management of choice for ESRD caused by ADPKD; a living donor is preferable to a cadaveric donor
Dialysis is the second-line management of ESRD caused by ADPKD; haemodialysis is preferred to peritoneal dialysis in this group
Tolvaptan
for select patient groups:
The 2015 NICE Guidelines recommend the use of tolvaptan to slow the progression of cyst formation and renal insufficiency in adults with ADPKD if:
They have chronic kidney disease stage 2 or 3 at the start of treatment
There is evidence of rapidly progressive disease
Tolvaptan is a vasopressin V
2
receptor antagonist which has been shown to inhibit cyst growth and preserve kidney function
Common side effects of tolvaptan are thirst, polyuria and nocturia
Improve
Complications
ADPKD can lead to serious
renal and extrarenal
complications.
Hepatic cysts
75% of patients with ADPKD have
hepatic cysts
by the age of 60
The majority of hepatic cysts are asymptomatic and do not require treatment
Some patients may experience heartburn, nausea, early satiety and an increased abdominal circumference due to hepatomegaly caused by hepatic cysts
Cardiovascular disease
Approximately 60% of patients with ADPKD have
hypertension
which increases the risk of
coronary heart disease, stroke and myocardial infarction
Mitral valve prolapse, mitral regurgitation, aortic regurgitation and dilated aortic root are also associated with ADPKD
Intracranial aneurysms and subarachnoid haemorrhage
Intracranial berry aneurysms can be found in
6%
of patients with ADPKD
without a family history of brain aneurysms
In patients with ADPKD
with a family history of brain aneurysms
, up to
16%
have intracranial berry aneurysms
Due to the increased incidence of berry aneurysms in ADPKD, the risk of
subarachnoid haemorrhage
is increased
Subarachnoid haemorrhages cause substantial morbidity and mortality
Patients with ADPKD and a family history of subarachnoid haemorrhages are offered a magnetic resonance angiography (MRA) scan at intervals of 1 to 5 years to screen for intracranial aneurysms
If aneurysms are detected they may be treated surgically using a clip or coil to prevent rupture
Complications during pregnancy
The incidence of
gestational hypertension and preeclampsia
is higher in women with ADPKD
Hypertension during pregnancy increases the risk of adverse fetal and maternal outcomes
End-stage renal disease
ADPKD accounts for 4-10% of all cases of ESRD
Management involves
renal transplantation or dialysis
Improve
Prognosis
Over 50% of patients with ADPKD develop ESRD requiring dialysis or renal transplantation.
Factors indicating a poorer prognosis are:
Earlier age at diagnosis
Male sex
Type 1 ADPKD (mutation in PKD1)
Rapidly increasing kidney size
Hypertension
Cardiovascular disease is the most common cause of death in patients with ADPKD.
Improve
Screening and prevention
Screening adults with a positive family history of ADPKD
Screening should be offered to asymptomatic adults with a positive family history  of ADPKD
Screening is most commonly performed using an abdominal ultrasound, but occasionally MRI or CT may be used
Although there is no proven treatment to prevent ADPKD developing, screening can help identify
hypertension
earlier and therefore reduce the risk of cardiovascular disease
Screening children with a positive family history of ADPKD
Asymptomatic children with a positive family history of ADPKD may be screened at any age, however, false negative results are higher as imaging may miss small cysts in younger people
For this reason, children with a positive family history of ADPKD tend not to be screened unless they are symptomatic
This means that children often require additional screening scan/s in adulthood
Improve
Nephrology
Autosomal dominant polycystic kidney disease