Cerebral palsy
Cerebral palsy
Cerebral palsy may be defined as a disorder of movement and posture due to a non-progressive lesion of the motor pathways in the developing brain. It affects 2 in 1,000 live births and is the most common cause of major motor impairment
Last updated: 1
st
January 2025
Aetiology
Causes
antenatal (80%): e.g. cerebral malformation and congenital infection (rubella, toxoplasmosis, CMV)
intrapartum (10%): birth asphyxia/trauma
postnatal (10%): intraventricular haemorrhage, meningitis, head-trauma
Improve
Classification
Cerebral palsy (CP) is classified according to several parameters including
motor type, anatomical distribution, and functional ability
. Classification guides assessment, management planning and prognostication.
Motor Type Classification
Based on the predominant neuromuscular abnormality:
Spastic CP
(70-80% of cases): characterised by increased muscle tone, hyperreflexia, and pathological reflexes. Results from damage to the pyramidal tracts.
Dyskinetic CP
(10-15%): characterised by involuntary, uncontrolled movements that are particularly evident during voluntary movement. Includes athetoid, choreoathetoid and dystonic subtypes. Associated with basal ganglia injury.
Ataxic CP
(5-10%): characterised by disturbed coordination, hypotonia and intention tremor. Results from cerebellar damage.
Mixed CP
: demonstrates features of more than one motor type, commonly spastic-dyskinetic presentations.
Topographical Classification
Based on the anatomical distribution of motor impairment:
Hemiplegia
: involvement of one side of the body, typically with greater upper limb than lower limb involvement.
Diplegia
: involvement of all four limbs with lower limbs more severely affected than upper limbs.
Quadriplegia
(tetraplegia): involvement of all four limbs with equal or greater involvement of upper limbs compared to lower limbs. Often associated with bulbar involvement affecting speech and swallowing.
Monoplegia
: involvement of a single limb (rare).
Triplegia
: involvement of three limbs (rare).
Functional Classification
Gross Motor Function Classification System (GMFCS)
: internationally recognised five-level system that describes gross motor function, focusing on sitting, transfers and mobility.
Level I: Walks without limitations
Level II: Walks with limitations
Level III: Walks using a hand-held mobility device
Level IV: Self-mobility with limitations; may use powered mobility
Level V: Transported in a manual wheelchair
Other functional classifications include:
Manual Ability Classification System (MACS)
: describes how children with CP use their hands to handle objects in daily activities.
Communication Function Classification System (CFCS)
: describes everyday communication effectiveness.
NICE guidelines recommend using standardised functional classification systems to aid communication between healthcare professionals and families
.
Improve
Clinical features
Possible manifestations include:
abnormal tone early infancy
delayed motor milestones
abnormal gait
feeding difficultie.
Children with cerebral palsy often have associated non-motor problems such as:
learning difficulties (60%)
epilepsy (30%)
squints (30%)
hearing impairment (20%)
Improve
Management
Management
as with any child with a chronic condition a multidisciplinary approach is needed
treatments for spasticity include oral diazepam, oral and intrathecal baclofen, botulinum toxin type A, orthopaedic surgery and selective dorsal rhizotomy
anticonvulsants, analgesia as required
Improve
References
NICE - 2012 Spasticity in children and young people with non-progressive brain disorders
NICE - 2017 Cerebral Palsy guidelines
Paediatric neurology
Cerebral palsy