Croup
Croup
Croup, also known as laryngotracheobronchitis, is a common viral infection of the upper airways in children. Inflammation of the larynx causes the classic barking
cough
,
stridor
, and may be accompanied by a low fever.
Prior to this typical presentation, a prodromal period of non-specific upper respiratory tract symptoms (coryza, non-barking cough, mild fever) may occur for 12-48 hours. The barking cough and respiratory distress then typically last 1-2 days before recovery.
Croup affects children between the ages of 6 months and 3 years, and is more common in autumn. The parainfluenza virus is most commonly implicated in croup.
Last updated: 16
th
January 2024
Epidemiology
Incidence: 250.00 cases per 100,000 person-years
Peak incidence: 1-5 years
Sex ratio: more common in males 1.4:1
Condition
Relative
incidence
Viral upper respiratory tract infections
120.00
Bronchiolitis
2.00
Croup
1
Acute epiglottitis
0.01
<1
1-5
6+
16+
30+
40+
50+
60+
70+
80+
Aetiology
Aetiology is most commonly viral, with some cases caused by bacteria.
Viral
Parainfluenza virus is the principal cause of acute laryngotracheobronchitis, accounting for 75% of infections.
Other causes include influenza A and B, measles, adenovirus, and respiratory syncytial virus (RSV).
Bacterial
The common bacterial causes are
Staphylococcus aureus
,
Streptococcus pneumoniae
,
Haemophilus influenzae
, and
Moraxella catarrhalis
.
Croup is droplet spread and outbreaks can occur in childcare settings or school, most commonly in autumn. Croup is more common in males (1.4:1).
Improve
Pathophysiology
- Following a coryzal prodrome, white blood cells infiltrate the larynx, trachea and large bronchi, causing inflammation.
This inflammation causes oedema which results in partial airway obstruction.
When significant, this airway obstruction  dramatically increases the work of breathing and causes the characteristic turbulent airflow known as
stridor
.
Improve
Classification
NICE (CKS) suggest using the following criteria to grade the severity:
Mild
Moderate
Severe
Occasional barking
cough
No audible
stridor
at rest
No or mild suprasternal and/or intercostal recession
The child is happy and is prepared to eat, drink, and play
Frequent barking cough
Easily
audible stridor at rest
Suprasternal and sternal wall retraction at rest
No or little distress or agitation
The child can be placated and is interested in its surroundings
Frequent barking cough
Prominent inspiratory (and occasionally, expiratory) stridor at rest
Marked sternal wall retractions
Significant distress and agitation, or lethargy or restlessness (a sign of hypoxaemia)
Tachycardia occurs with more severe obstructive symptoms and hypoxaemia
CKS suggest admitting any child with:
moderate or severe croup
< 3 months of age
known upper airway abnormalities (e.g. Laryngomalacia, Down's syndrome)
uncertainty about diagnosis (important differentials include
acute epiglottitis
, bacterial tracheitis, peritonsillar abscess and foreign body inhalation)
Improve
Clinical features
Children with croup may present to general practice or the Emergency Department (ED).
Croup is suggested by a coryzal prodrome which then progresses over 12 to 48 hours to include:
Low fever
Usually less than 38ºC
Hoarseness
Barking
cough
Worse at night
Stridor
Insidious and progressive
As airway obstruction progresses, features of respiratory distress may develop:
Tachypnoea
Cyanosis
Head bobbing
Nasal flaring
Subcostal and intercostal recession
Suprasternal and sternal recession
Diaphragmatic breathing
Use of accessory muscles.
Improve
Investigations
- Croup is a primarily clinical diagnosis, suggested by the presence of barking
cough
and
stridor
, especially in the context of a local community outbreak.
For the vast majority of children presenting to primary/secondary care with symptoms of  classic croup on history and physical examination, no further investigation is necessary.
In some cases, however, laboratory studies or radiographs may be useful to rule out differential diagnoses.
Indications for radiographic evaluation include:
Uncertainty about the diagnosis
Atypical course of illness
Inhaled foreign body is suspected
Recurrent croup
Inadequate response to appropriate therapeutic interventions
Improve
Differential diagnosis
The following diagnoses have similarities to croup, but can usually be differentiated through history and physical examination.
Viral
upper respiratory tract infection
(
URTI
)
Similarities
Common in young children
Causes coryza,
cough
and respiratory distress
Differences
Seal-like barking cough less common
Bronchiolitis
Similarities
Causes cough, fever, and respiratory distress
Differences
Affects children < 2 years old
Causes wheeze
No barking quality to cough
Epiglottitis
Similarities
Stridor
Differences
Usually seen in children 3-5 years of age
Absence of barking cough
Muffled hot potato voice
Tripod or sniffing position
An incomplete vaccination history more likely to be present
Foreign body aspiration
Similarities
Often < 3 years of age
Stridor
Dysphonia depending on location of foreign body
Differences
History suggestive of possible foreign body
Abrupt onset during daytime (croup usually night-time)
Minimal response to adrenaline nebuliser
Bacterial tracheitis
Similarities
Stridor
Differences
Usually school-age
Soft stridor 2-7 days after onset of URTI symptoms
Significant tracheal tenderness on palpation
Reluctant to cough because of pain
Other differential diagnoses include anaphylaxis and retropharyngeal abscess.
If the child is <6 months, consider laryngomalacia, tracheomalacia, or a vascular ring.
Improve
Management
Croup may be managed in primary or secondary care, depending on the severity of symptoms. All children with moderate or severe croup should be referred to the emergency department (ED).
The principles of treatment in mild and moderate croup are symptomatic relief, while the prevention of further airway compromise is paramount in severe croup.
NICE guidelines, last updated in 2019, suggest the following algorithm for the management of croup:
Primary care (mild illness)
Supportive care
Oral dexamethasone
Parents should be advised regarding:
The expected course of croup, including that symptoms usually resolve within 48 hours.
The need to take the child to hospital if
stridor
can be heard continually, the skin between the ribs is pulling in with every breath, and/or the child is restless or agitated.
The use of antipyretics in children distressed due to fever.
The need to check on the child regularly, including through the night.
Arrange follow-up, using clinical judgment to determine the appropriate interval.
Secondary care (moderate - severe illness)
All children with moderate-severe illness should be admitted
Supportive care
Oral dexamethasone
Nebulised epinephrine
Supplemental oxygen
The above advice should also be given
Children that present to the ED may be safely discharged home after 2 to 4 hours of observation following epinephrine administration, given they have no stridor at rest.
Improve
Complications
Complications of croup are generally due to airway obstruction caused by the oedema.
Respiratory distress is a significant complication of croup, manifesting as the signs listed above. This may progress to respiratory failure in some cases and even death.
Further complications are less common and include:
Pneumonia
Pulmonary oedema
Epiglottitis
Bacterial tracheitis
Improve
References
Clinical Knowledge Summaries - Croup guidelines
Paediatric respiratory
Croup