Necrotising enterocolitis
Necrotising enterocolitis
Necrotising enterocolitis (NEC) is a neonatal emergency with high morbidity and mortality.  By definition, NEC is fairly self-explanatory: death (necrotising) of intestinal tissue (entero-) due to inflammation (colitis). Whilst NEC can rarely affect term infants or adults, this article focuses on classical NEC which is an inflammatory intestinal disease in premature neonates. Incidence of NEC is quoted at 1 in 1000 live births and predominantly affects preterm and low birth weight neonates.
Last updated: 1
st
January 2025
Aetiology
NEC is known to be multifactorial in aetiology.
Some studies have shown NEC to be more common in:
Very low birth weight neonates
Preterm neonates
Growth restricted neonates
Black infants
Certain drugs have been associated with an increased risk of developing NEC including:
Neonatal administration of:
Antibiotics
H
2
blockers
Indomethacin
Antenatal use of:
Co-amoxiclav
Aggressive feeding and genetic predisposition are other reported risk factors for NEC.
Improve
Pathophysiology
The pathophysiology of NEC is not fully understood.  But perhaps the most significant contributing factor in the development of NEC is intestinal immaturity. The characteristic differences in neonatal intestines compromise multiple gastrointestinal protective factors:
Reduced gastric acid production
Reduced intestinal barrier
Immature immune function
Immature digestion
Immature motility
This intestinal immaturity is compounded by abnormal intestinal microbiota due to the frequent use of antibiotics in neonatal care.  This culminates in an excessive inflammatory response leading to tissue injury and intestinal necrosis.
Whilst antibiotics are a core feature in the management of NEC, no particular causative organism has been found.
Improve
Clinical features
Classical presentation of NEC is a premature neonate developing feeding intolerance, vomiting, lethargy and abdominal distension which progresses into bloody stools at around 9 days of age.
Examination findings might include:
Shiny distended abdomen
Periumbilical erythema
Abdominal tenderness
Bilious gastric aspirate
Shock
Neonates can deteriorate from showing early clinical signs to intestinal perforation and peritonitis within hours.
The Bell et al staging criteria based around clinical signs and symptoms, radiological evidence and viscous perforation are widely accepted measure of disease severity.
Severity
Stage
Signs
Radiological Signs
Suspected NEC
Stage I
Lethargy, apnoea, temperature instability, abdominal distention, vomiting, heme-positive stool
Radiology may be normal or show intestinal dilation
Proven NEC
Stage II
Similar to stage I with abdominal tenderness, abdominal wall discolouration, abdominal mass, mild metabolic acidosis
Intestinal dilation, ileus, ascites, pneumatosis intestinalis
Advanced NEC
Stage III
Critically ill neonate with hypotension, bradycardia, peritonitis, respiratory and metabolic acidosis, disseminated intravascular coagulation
Pneumoperitoneum
Improve
Investigations
Imaging
Abdominal radiography is central to NEC diagnosis. Radiological findings which are pathognomic of NEC include:
Pneumatosis intestinalis
Seen as gas in the bowel wall on x-ray
Portal vein gas
Other radiographical signs which can support a diagnosis of NEC include:
Dilated bowel loops
Absence of bowel gas
Persisting gas-filled bowel loops
Pneumoperitoneum can be seen in advance NEC.
Ultrasound has also been used to aid the diagnosis of NEC.
Bloods
As symptoms and signs of NEC are quite non-specific it is important to undertake initial screening bloods including:
Inflammatory markers
Blood gas
Routine biochemistry
Blood cultures
Bloods can also be useful in monitoring neonates with NEC. A rapid decrease in neutrophil count, platelet count or white cell count or persistently high C-reactive protein can indicate disease progression.
Improve
Differential diagnosis
Diagnosis is challenging as there are no reliable universally accepted diagnostic criteria for NEC and often definitive diagnosis via visualisation of necrosis or histopathological evidence is not available.
Given NEC's non-specific early presenting symptoms the most common differential diagnosis is sepsis.
Similarities:
Lethargy
Feeding intolerance and vomiting
High or rising serial C-reactive protein level
Shock
Differences:
The characteristic radiological findings of NEC are not present in sepsis
Another differential diagnosis when assessing neonates with NEC is infectious enteritis
Similarities:
Frequent stool which may be blood-stained
Abdominal distention
Differences:
The characteristic radiological findings of NEC are not present in infection enteritis
Spontaneous intestinal perforation of the newborn
Similarities:
More common in very low birthweight neonates
Abdominal distention
Differences:
Abscence of pneumatosis intestinalis on abdominal xray
Blue discolouration of abdominal wall
Occurs in first week of life
Cows milk protein intolerance may be misdiagnosed as NEC.
Similarities:
Abdominal distention
Increased passage of stool including bloody stool
Feeding intolerance
Association with parenteral nutrition
Differences:
Rare in neonates less than 6 weeks old
Improve
Management
Although there are no national guidelines on the management of NEC, an expert review in the New England Journal of Medicine outlined the management as:
Abdominal decompression via nasogastric tube insertion
Bowel rest via total parenteral nutrition
Broad-spectrum intravenous antibiotics
Generally consisting of a penicillin, gentamicin and metronidazole
Surgical management options (if perforation is suspected or the infant is deteriorating)
Peritoneal drain
Laparotomy with resection of necrotised bowel and enterostomy with stoma creation
As NEC is a neonatal emergency, management of affected infants is based in a neonatal intensive care unit.
Prevention is thought to be key given the diagnostic challenges around NEC and the high morbidity and mortality once NEC is established. The most effective and safe prevention options are breast-milk feeding and nonaggressive enteral feeding. Probiotics have been shown to be of benefit but are associated with increased incidence of sepsis in this patient group. There is evidence for antenatal steroids being of benefit but given safety implications, this preventative approach has not been widely adopted.
Improve
Complications
Complications from NEC in the short term include:
Death (20-30%).
Intestinal perforation (12%) and peritonitis with shock
Sepsis (9%)
Postoperative wound infections (6%)
Intraabdominal abscess formation (2.3%)
Longer-term complications include:
Short gut syndrome (9%), the most serious complication of NEC.
Short bowel syndrome is characterised by malabsorption following intestinal resection
Intestinal strictures (9%)
Systemic inflammation in NEC has also been associated with a significantly increased risk of neurodevelopmental delay.
Improve
Prognosis
A diagnosis of NEC has been found to increase neonatal inpatient admission duration by 20-60 days. Neonates requiring surgical intervention have been found to have worse outcomes and the highest death rate. The mortality rate from NEC is estimated at 20-30%.
-
Improve
Neonatology
Necrotising enterocolitis