Prematurity
Prematurity
Prematurity, also known as preterm birth, refers to the birth of a baby at fewer than 37 weeks gestational age. These babies, referred to as premature or preterm infants, often face numerous health challenges due to their underdeveloped organ systems. It occurs in around 5-10% of pregnancies (6% of singletons, 45% of twins)
Background
The physiology of preterm infants is significantly affected by their early arrival. The most critical period for organ development occurs between 24 and 28 weeks gestation; therefore, infants born before this time are particularly vulnerable. Their lungs lack surfactant leading to respiratory distress syndrome (RDS), and their immature immune system increases susceptibility to infection. Other complications may include necrotizing enterocolitis due to underdeveloped gastrointestinal tract and intraventricular haemorrhage because of fragile blood vessels in the brain.
Differential Diagnosis
Prematurity can be instigated by various factors including both maternal and foetal conditions
unexplained (30-40%)
multiple pregnancies (20-30%)
congenital abnormalities
antepartum haemorrhage
pre-eclampsia
cervical incompetence
diabetes mellitus
polyhydramnios
uterine abnormalities
infections e.g. Pyelonephritis
Initial Management
Management
admit, and consider transfer to specialist facilities
in 50% contractions cease spontaneously
look for and treat any cause - this may stop contractions
do vaginal exam if membranes intact: repeat to check for cervical changes
tocolysis (e.g. nifedipine): allows steroids to be given, rarely works if dilation > 4 cm. Salbutamol and other betamimetics are not recommended as tocolytic drugs by NICE for preterm labour.
steroids: reduce incidence of respiratory distress syndrome between 26-34 wks
ultrasound and CTG to monitor fetus
senior obstetrician & neonatal paediatrician present at birth
Risk of prematurity
increased mortality depends on the gestation
respiratory distress syndrome
intraventricular haemorrhage
necrotizing enterocolitis
chronic lung disease, hypothermia, feeding problems, infection, jaundice
retinopathy of prematurity
important cause of visual impairment in babies born before 32 weeks gestation
the cause is not fully understood and multivariate. One of the contributing factors is thought to be over oxygenation (e.g. during ventilation) resulting in a proliferation of retinal blood vessels (neovascularization)
screening is done in at-risk groups
hearing problems
Last updated: 9
th
October 2023
References
NICE - 2015 Preterm labour and birth guidelines
Neonatology
Prematurity