Urinary tract infection (child)
Urinary tract infection (child)
Urinary tract infection
(UTI) is a common bacterial infection in children, especially in girls. The diagnosis of UTI in children can be challenging as the symptoms may be non-specific or absent. Therefore, it is important to have a high index of suspicion in children with unexplained
fever
,
abdominal pain
,
vomiting
, or poor feeding. A urine culture is the gold standard for diagnosis, and a positive result indicates the presence of significant bacteriuria.
Last updated: 1
st
January 2025
Epidemiology
Incidence: 2000.00 cases per 100,000 person-years
Most commonly see in infants
Sex ratio: more common in females 3:1
<1
1-5
6+
16+
30+
40+
50+
60+
70+
80+
Aetiology
The most common causative agent for UTIs in children is
Escherichia coli
, accounting for approximately 80% of cases. Other pathogens include
Klebsiella pneumoniae
,
Proteus mirabilis
,
Enterococcus spp.
, and
Staphylococcus saprophyticus
.
Improve
Clinical features
Clinical features vary depending on the child's age and the severity of infection.
Lower
Urinary Tract Infection
(Cystitis)
Dysuria
: Painful or difficult urination may be reported by older children or observed as crying during voiding in younger children.
Frequency: Increased frequency of urination with small voided volumes.
Urgency: Sudden compelling need to urinate with an inability to delay.
Haematuria
: Presence of blood in urine may be macroscopic or microscopic.
Suprapubic pain or tenderness
Foul-smelling urine
Enuresis or daytime incontinence
Upper Urinary Tract Infection (Pyelonephritis)
Fever
(>38°C) with or without chills
Flank pain
or costovertebral angle tenderness
Abdominal pain
,
nausea
, and
vomiting
Lethargy
or irritability
Poor feeding or
failure to thrive
in infants
Age-specific Clinical Features
Age Group
Features
Neonates and Infants (< 3 months)
Non-specific symptoms: Fever, hypothermia, jaundice, vomiting, diarrhoea, lethargy, poor feeding, or failure to thrive.
Respiratory distress or apnea
Abdominal distension
Infants and Toddlers (3 months - 2 years)
Generalized symptoms: Fever, irritability, lethargy, poor appetite or vomiting.
Strong-smelling urine or diaper rash
Preschool and School-aged Children (2-12 years)
Lower urinary tract symptoms: Dysuria, frequency, urgency, hematuria.
Systemic symptoms: Fever with chills (more common in pyelonephritis), abdominal pain.
Adolescents (12-18 years)
Similar presentation to adults: Dysuria, frequency, urgency.
Sexual activity may be a risk factor for UTIs in adolescent females.
Improve
Management
Management
infants less than 3 months old should be referred immediately to a paediatrician
children aged more than 3 months old with an upper UTI should be considered for admission to hospital. If not admitted oral antibiotics such as cephalosporin or co-amoxiclav should be given for 7-10 days
children aged more than 3 months old with a lower UTI should be treated with oral antibiotics for 3 days according to local guidelines, usually trimethoprim, nitrofurantoin, cephalosporin or amoxicillin. Parents should be asked to bring the children back if they remain unwell after 24-48 hours
antibiotic prophylaxis is not given after the first UTI but should be considered with recurrent UTIs
Improve
References
NICE - 2007 urinary tract infection in children guidelines
Clinical Knowledge Summaries - Urinary tract infection in children guidelines
Paediatric nephrology and urology
Urinary tract infection (child)