Cluster headache
Cluster headache
Cluster headaches are known to be one of the most painful conditions that patients can have the misfortune to suffer. The name relates to the pattern of the headaches - they typically occur in clusters lasting several weeks, with the clusters themselves typically once a year.
Last updated: 22
nd
January 2023
Epidemiology
Incidence: 10.00 cases per 100,000 person-years
Peak incidence: 50-60 years
Sex ratio: more common in males 3:1
Condition
Relative
incidence
Migraine
500.00
Trigeminal neuralgia
1.50
Cluster headache
1
Paroxysmal hemicrania
0.02
<1
1-5
6+
16+
30+
40+
50+
60+
70+
80+
Aetiology
The precise aetiology of cluster headache remains unclear; however, several factors have been identified that contribute to its development.
Male sex
is a recognised risk factor, with cluster headache being significantly more common in men than women.
There is often a
family history
, suggesting a genetic predisposition. First-degree relatives are at increased risk compared to the general population.
Cigarette smoking is strongly associated with cluster headache. Most individuals affected are current or former smokers, although cessation does not always lead to improvement.
Alcohol can act as a trigger during active cluster periods but is not thought to be an underlying cause.
Cluster headaches typically begin between the ages of 20 and 40 years, though onset outside this range can occur.
Some evidence suggests that certain medications (e.g., vasodilators such as nitroglycerin) may precipitate attacks in susceptible individuals during active phases, but do not cause the condition itself.
No clear association has been established with socioeconomic status, diet or most environmental exposures.
Structural brain lesions are rare but should be considered if atypical features are present; routine neuroimaging is recommended in line with
NICE
guidance for new-onset cluster headache.
Improve
Clinical features
Features
Pain
Intense sharp, stabbing pain around one eye (recurrent attacks 'always' affect same side)
Typical occurs once or twice a day, each episode lasting 15 mins - 2 hours
Clusters typically last 4-12 weeks
Patient is restless and agitated during an attack
Often accompanied by redness, nasal stuffiness, lacrimation, lid swelling
Miosis
and
ptosis
in a minority
Improve
Investigations
- most patients will have neuroimaging - underlying brain lesions are sometimes found even if the clinical symptoms are typical for cluster headache
MRI with gadolinium contrast is the investigation of choice
Improve
Diagnosis
From the International Headache Society we present the third edition of the International Classification of Headache Disorders:
A. At least five attacks fulfilling criteria B-D
B. Severe or very severe unilateral orbital, supraorbital and/or temporal pain lasting 15-180 minutes (when untreated)
C. Either or both of the following:
1. at least one of the following symptoms or signs, ipsilateral to the headache:
conjunctival injection and/or lacrimation
nasal congestion and/or rhinorrhoea
eyelid oedema
forehead and facial sweating
miosis
and/or
ptosis
2. a sense of restlessness or agitation
D. Occurring with a frequency between one every other day and 8 per day
E. Not better accounted for by another ICHD-3 diagnosis.
Improve
Management
Management
Acute:
100% oxygen (80% response rate within 15 minutes), subcutaneous triptan  (75% response rate within 15 minutes)
Prophylaxis:
Verapamil is the drug of choice
There is also some evidence to support a tapering dose of prednisolone
NICE recommend seeking specialist advice from a neurologist if a patient develops cluster headaches with respect to neuroimaging
Some neurologists use the term trigeminal autonomic cephalgia to group a number of conditions including cluster headache,
paroxysmal hemicrania
and short-lived unilateral neuralgiform headache with conjunctival injection and tearing (SUNCT). It is recommended such patients are referred for specialist assessment as specific treatment may be required, for example it is known paroxysmal hemicrania responds very well to indomethacin.
Improve
References
NICE - 2012 Headache guidelines
Neurology
Cluster headache