Frontotemporal lobar degeneration
Frontotemporal lobar degeneration
Frontotemporal lobar degeneration (FTLD) is a primary neurodegenerative condition resulting in 2% of dementia cases. It is the second most common cause of dementia in patients under 65 and it is characterised by a progressive illness leading to behavioural changes and language problems. The aetiology is poorly understood however some genetic causes have been identified. There is currently no treatment and management follows a supportive approach.
Last updated: 1
st
January 2025
Epidemiology
Incidence: 3.00 cases per 100,000 person-years
Peak incidence: 50-60 years
Sex ratio: 1:1
Condition
Relative
incidence
Alzheimer's disease
100.00
Vascular dementia
23.33
Lewy body dementia
20.00
Frontotemporal lobar degeneration
1
<1
1-5
6+
16+
30+
40+
50+
60+
70+
80+
Aetiology
The aetiology of frontotemporal lobar degeneration is poorly characterised but is likely to be due to a combination of genetics and lifestyle factors.
Up to 50% of patients have a positive family history of dementia and 10% of cases show autosomal dominant inheritance.
Known genetic mutations have been identified in the following genes:
MAPT
Resulting in tau inclusion bodies
Progranulin gene (PGRN)
Resulting in TDP-43 inclusion bodies
C9orf72
Repeat expansions within this gene are commonly found in FTLD and amyotrophic lateral sclerosis.
Improve
Pathophysiology
The pathophysiology of FTLD includes degenerative change in the frontal and temporal lobes at both a macroscopic and microscopic level.
Macroscopic changes
The macroscopic changes differ between the different types as summarised below:
Behavioural variant FTD
MRI or CT shows symmetrical atrophy predominantly affecting the frontal lobes with some evidence of temporal lobes being affected.
Nonfluent/agrammatic variant PPA
MRI or CT shows variable atrophy most commonly in the posterior frontal lobe, insular cortex and temporal lobe, including the hippocampus. This is seen to affect the left side to a greater extent.
Semantic variant PPA
MRI or CT shows left sided temporal lobe and hippocampus atrophy. Frontal lobes are relatively spared early in disease.
Histological changes
Histopathology shows axonal injury and inclusion bodies concentrated in the frontal and temporal lobes. The two main variants are:
Tau inclusion bodies (also known as tauopathies, pick bodies or FTD-tau)
Tau is a microtubule-associated protein coded for by the microtubule-associated protein tau gene (MAPT)
Inclusions of immunoreactive ubiquitin (FTLD-U)
This subset is commonly associated with a mutation in the progranulin gene (PGRN) resulting in TAR-DNA binding protein (TDP)-43.
Improve
Classification
Frontotemporal lobar degeneration (FTLD) is characterised into three primary clinical syndromes: behavioural variant frontotemporal dementia (bvFTD), semantic dementia (SD), and progressive nonfluent aphasia (PNFA). Each subtype exhibits distinct symptomatology, yet they share overlapping pathophysiological features.
Behavioural variant Frontotemporal Dementia (bvFTD):
This is the most common form of FTLD. It is marked by changes in personality and behaviour, including disinhibition, apathy, loss of empathy or compulsive behaviours. Neuroimaging often reveals frontal and anterior temporal lobe atrophy.
Semantic Dementia (SD):
Also known as semantic variant primary progressive aphasia, it presents with loss of semantic knowledge - patients have difficulty understanding words or recognising familiar people or objects. Neuroimaging shows selective left anterior temporal lobe atrophy.
Progressive Nonfluent Aphasia (PNFA):
Characterised by progressive language disorder with non-fluent speech and grammatical errors. Patients may also show signs of agrammatism or apraxia of speech. Neuroimaging typically reveals left perisylvian or insular atrophy.
The neuropathological classification of FTLD relies on the predominant protein found in inclusion bodies:
Tau-positive FTLD:
In this type, tau proteins accumulate abnormally within neurons leading to neurofibrillary tangles. Three major types exist based on the morphology and distribution of tau inclusions: Pick's disease, corticobasal degeneration, and progressive supranuclear palsy.
TDP-43 positive FTLD:
Characterised by the accumulation of transactive response DNA binding protein 43 (TDP-43). Four subtypes exist (A to D) based on the distribution and morphology of TDP-43 inclusions.
FUS-positive FTLD:
Less common, characterised by the presence of fused in sarcoma (FUS) protein within inclusion bodies. These are typically seen in younger patients and often associated with a more aggressive disease course.
Improve
Clinical features
Patients with FTLD and their relatives may describe behaviours with an
insidious onset
showing
progressive deterioration
and associated with a
function decline.
Symptoms described may include:
Behavioural changes
- predominant feature in behavioral variant FTLD
Early apathy (85%)
Decline in social interpersonal conduct (80%)
Early disinhibition (75%)
Early loss of empathy (70%)
Early perseverative (65%)
Hyperorality (50%)
Decline in hygiene (50-60%)
Primitive reflexes (25%)
Difficulties with speech
- predominant feature in PPA
Language difficulty as the predominant feature
Aphasia
Decrease in speed of speech
Difficulties with comprehension
Syntax
Object naming
Decline in executive functioning and cognition
Difficulty planning
Poor concentration
Memory problems
Short term memory problems
Difficulty with recall
An important aspect of the presentation is that behaviour or speech changes are noticed prior to memory problems and this can help distinguish it from other
dementias
. Up to 40% of patients have a positive family history with 10% showing an autosomal pattern of inheritance.
Examination
Patients may exhibit features of behavioural change and speech difficulties as above during the consultation.
Neurological exam is often grossly normal but they may present with:
Parkinsonism - tremor, rigidity and bradykinesia
Signs of ALS such as progressive muscle weakness including bulbar muscles (10-15%)
Cognitive testing may show impairment but may be normal.
Improve
Investigations
This condition is a clinical diagnosis. If FTLD is suspected based on history and examination it is important to perform the following investigations:
Dementia screening bloods to exclude organic causes:
FBC - to rule out anaemia
ESR & CRP - signs of infection or vasculitis
T4 and TSH - to rule out hypothyroidism
U&Es - evidence of renal failure or electrolyte disturbances (e.g. hypercalcaemia, hypocalcemia etc)
B12 and folate - vitamin deficiencies may cause dementia
Coagulation screen and albumin - assess liver function
Glucose
Midstream urine - if concerned about delirium
Syphilis serology and HIV testing if clinically indicated
Formal cognitive testing
Mini-mental state examination (MMSE)
Montreal clinical assessment (MoCA)
If FTLD is still suspected patients should be referred to specialist psychiatric or memory services.
Further investigations include:
Structural imaging such as MRI or CT scan
This may show atrophy in the frontal and temporal regions.
May also exclude other structural or reversible causes.
FDG-PET or SPECT scan
Only performed if the diagnosis is still unclear.
Genetic testing
Only performed if positive family history.
Improve
Differential diagnosis
FTLD may present similarly to other conditions that also affect behaviour, memory and cognitive functioning.
Possible differential diagnoses may include:
Alzheimer's disease
(AD)
Similarities:
Loss of apathy
Subtle
personality changes
and loss of interest in daily activities
Grossly unremarkable physical exam
Differences:
Memory loss
predominates in AD
CT brain shows global atrophy in AD
Vascular dementia
Similarities:
Loss of apathy
Loss of executive functions
Impulsivity and irritability
Relative preservation of memory
Differences:
Presence of cardiovascular risk factors
CT brain will show evidence of infarcts
Dementia with Lewy bodies (DLB)
Similarities:
Loss of apathy
Cognitive fluctuations
Differences:
Visual hallucinations and motor signs are key features in DLB
Personality is relatively preserved
Depression
Similarities:
Loss of apathy
Loss of empathy
Psychomotor retardation
Memory loss
Differences:
Anhedonia in depression
Patient reports feeling depressed
Less common differentials may also include:
Delirium
B12 deficiency
Hypothyroidism
Bipolar
OCD
Normal pressure hydrocephalus
Brain tumour
CJD
Syphilis
HIV
Improve
Management
There are no disease modifying treatments currently recommended for FTLD and therefore management is focused on supportive care and symptom management.
Management approach should include:
Supportive management
Referral to specialist psychiatry or
neurology
services
Patient and carer education
Explain the disease course and progression
Discuss driving - advise they are legally required to inform DVLA of diagnosis
Consider care needs and develop a care plan
Physiotherapy and occupational therapy assessment
Present day needs
Anticipated future needs
Follow up 6-12 monthly
Consider end of life care planning early on.
Symptomatic control
Non-drug therapy - this is recommended as first line therapy
Group therapy
Support groups
Pharmacological therapies - these should only be used if non-drug therapies have failed.
Benzodiazepines - for acute agitation and distress.
SSRIs - for associated depression, anxiety, irritability and disinhibition.
Antipsychotics - very low doses should be used and as a last resort.
Oxytocin - emerging evidence suggests this may help with improving empathy but is not yet approved.
Acetylcholinesterase inhibitors or memantine hydrochloride are
not
recommended in patients with FTLD.
Improve
Prognosis
FTLD is a progressive condition with no known cause. It is also an umbrella term for a group of heterogeneous conditions and therefore some variation between different subtypes may exist.
Clinical cohorts show survival of 7-13 years from diagnosis
Neuropathology series show survival from 6-8 years.
If associated with ALS survival is shorter at about 3-5 years.
.
As the disease progresses patients may require increasing support and care and end of life planning short be carried out early to ensure the patient can participate in this.
Improve
Dementias
Frontotemporal lobar degeneration