Idiopathic intracranial hypertension
Idiopathic intracranial hypertension
Idiopathic intracranial hypertension (IIH) is a disorder characterised by symptoms and signs of increased intracranial pressure without any clear cause evident on neuroimaging and other investigations. It is also known as pseudotumour cerebri. The primarily affected group are overweight women of childbearing age.  Most patients experience a gradual onset of progressively worsening symptoms, and the illness may be self-limiting or follow a chronic course. Untreated disease can lead to significant visual impairment.
Last updated: 23
rd
July 2024
Epidemiology
Incidence: 2.00 cases per 100,000 person-years
Peak incidence: 20-30 years
Sex ratio: more common in females 8:1
Condition
Relative
incidence
Brain tumours
9.50
Subarachnoid haemorrhage
4.00
Idiopathic intracranial hypertension
1
Central venous thrombosis
0.43
<1
1-5
6+
16+
30+
40+
50+
60+
70+
80+
Aetiology
The cause of idiopathic intracranial hypertension is unknown.
Significant risk factors include:
Female gender (90% of those affected are female)
Obesity (often associated with recent weight gain)
Pregnancy
Certain medications have been linked to IIH. These include:
Combined oral contraceptive pill
Tetracyclines (doxycycline, minocycline)
Retinoids (isotretinoin, tretinoin)
Lithium
Thyroxine
Nitrofurantoin
Improve
Pathophysiology
Although many theories for IIH have been proposed, the precise pathogenesis of IIH remains unknown.
Proposed explanations include:
Increased cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) outflow resistance at the level of either the arachnoid granulations or CSF lymphatic drainage sites: One hypothesis proposes that microthrombosis in the sagittal sinus may block CSF absorption in the arachnoid granulations there, even in the absence of a thrombosis of sufficient size to be seen on neuroimaging studies. However, known causes of impaired CSF absorption (including subarachnoid hemorrhage and infectious meningitis) and CSF overproduction (choroid plexus papilloma) produce hydrocephalus, which is not seen in IIH.
Obesity-related increased abdominal and intracranial venous pressure: There is some evidence to suggest that leads to IIH through increased intra-abdominal pressure, pleural pressure, cardiac filling pressure, and central venous pressure.
Cerebral venous outflow abnormalities (e.g. venous stenoses and venous hypertension)
Altered sodium and water retention mechanisms
Abnormalities of vitamin A metabolism
Improve
Clinical features
Symptoms of IIH are usually gradual and progressive, including:
Common symptoms:
Headache
- 90%
The features of headaches in IIH patients are variable and are not specific to IIH.
They may be intermittent or persistent, occur daily or less frequently.
Nausea
and
vomiting
may occur in association with the headache.
Transient visual obscurations - 70%
These last seconds at a time and can be bilateral or unilateral.
The frequency is variable, ranging from rare or isolated episodes to those occurring several times a day.
The visual obscurations may be associated with changes in position (usually standing) or Valsalva
May be due to transient optic nerve ischaemia
Pulsatile
tinnitus
- 55%
This symptom in association with a headache is very suggestive of IIH.
Photopsia - 50%
Bright flashes of light that may occur following changes in position, Valsalva, bright light or eye movement.
Back pain - 50%
Retrobulbar pain - 45%
Less common symptoms:
Diplopia - 30%
Intermittent or continuous horizontal diplopia.
Sustained visual loss - 30%
Physical signs:
Papilloedema
- 95%
Typically bilateral and symmetric, but may also be asymmetric/unilateral.
Visual field loss
- 95%
Typically peripheral , but central visual field can be involved late in the course of disease or earlier if there is concurrent macular disease.
6th nerve palsy
Relative afferent pupillary defect
Improve
Investigations
All individuals with symptoms and signs of increased intracranial pressure should be urgently referred for neuroimaging to rule out secondary causes of intracranial hypertension.
As per British Medical Journal (BMJ) Best Practice Guidelines and European
Headache
Federation 2018 Guideline, first-line investigations include:
Blood tests
Coagulation tests to identify hypercoagulable states that are associated with a higher risk of venous thrombosis
Endocrine disorders that may mimic IIH symptoms include Addison's disease, Cushing's syndrome, hypoparathyroidism as well as the use of growth hormones and may need to be excluded.
Other medical conditions that may induce a secondary increase of ICP and should be identified via serologic examinations include systemic infections, uraemia and renal failure.
Visual field testing (perimetry)
To assess extent of visual field defects.
Optic disc photographs
To grade extent of
papilloedema
.
MRI brain
To rule out intracranial mass lesions and to identify structural alterations associated with IIH.
Features suggestive of IIH include an empty sella turcica (or at least significant changes in size, shape and volume of the pituitary gland) and a flattening of the posterior optic globe.
IIH also leads to an enlargement of the optic nerve sheath and an increased tortuosity of the optic nerve.
Lumbar puncture
Can be done once intracranial mass lesions are excluded on MRI.
European federation guidelines state this investigation is mandatory in the investigation of IIH. In addition to a normal CSF composition, diagnosis of IIH requires that opening pressure, which should be measured in the
lateral decubitus position with stretched legs and without sedative medications
,  exceeds 25 cmH
2
O in adults and 28 cmH
2
O in children.
Further investigations to consider are:
Magnetic resonance venogram of head
To rule out venous thrombosis
Ocular coherence tomography (OCT)
Improve
Differential diagnosis
In the assessment of an individual with symptoms and signs of increased intracranial pressure, secondary causes of intracranial hypertension must be considered. All of the following can cause symptoms similar to that of IIH:
Intracranial mass lesions (tumor, abscess)
Differences
Tend to affect children and older adults
May cause further focal neurological deficits such as limb weakness/paraesthesia
May cause seizures, fluctuating level of consciousness
Subarachnoid haemorrhage
Differences
Usually sudden onset (thunderclap
headache
)
May cause further focal neurological deficits such as limb weakness/paraesthesia
May cause seizures, fluctuating level of consciousness
Obstruction of venous outflow, eg, venous sinus thrombosis, jugular vein compression, neck surgery
Differences
Often develops suddenly (thunderclap headache)
May cause further focal neurological deficits such as limb weakness/paraesthesia
May cause seizures, fluctuating level of consciousness
Decreased CSF absorption, eg, arachnoid granulation adhesions after bacterial or other infectious meningitis, subarachnoid hemorrhage
Differences
Past medical history of infectious meningitis/SAH
Malignant systemic hypertension
Differences
Systemic blood pressure >180/120
Improve
Management
Principles of management in IIH include the
alleviation of symptoms
and the
preservation of vision
. All individuals with symptoms and signs of increased intracranial pressure should be urgently referred for neuroimaging to rule out secondary causes of intracranial hypertension in higher level care. As per European
Headache
Federation and BMJ Best Practice Guidelines, the management is as follows:
Conservative
Weight loss
: all overweight patients should be prescribed a low sodium weight reduction programme (IIH Treatment Trial). BMJ Best Practice guidelines suggest that overweight patients should aim to lose 5-10% of total body weight.
Where possible, potentially causative medications such as tetracyclines, retinoids and thyroid replacement therapies, should be stopped.
Regular ophthalmic follow-up with visual field testing is required to assess response to treatment and disease course.
Medical
Acetazolamide is first-line for all patients with visual loss on presentation
Topiramate may be used as an alternative and has the added benefit of causing weight loss in most patients
Refractory cases
loop diuretics may be used
repeated lumbar punctures may be used as a 'holding' measure in refractory cases but are not used longer-term
Analgesia: Paracetamol/NSAIDs are recommended first-line for head or back pain.
Surgical
If patients lose vision in spite of maximal medical therapy, surgical treatment by optic nerve sheath fenestration or CSF shunting can be done.
+ Ventriculoperitoneal Shunt:  Reserved for patients with refractory IIH or those with rapidly progressive visual loss. The procedure diverts excess CSF from the brain to the peritoneal cavity.
Lumboperitoneal Shunt: Alternative to ventriculoperitoneal shunting, particularly if there are contraindications to the latter. It carries a similar risk profile and efficacy.
Venous Sinus Stenting: A newer intervention which may be considered in patients with venous sinus stenosis and refractory symptoms.
Optic Nerve Sheath Fenestration: Primarily used to preserve vision in patients with progressive visual loss despite medical therapy. It involves making an incision in the optic nerve sheath to allow excess CSF to escape.
With treatment, there is usually gradual improvement and/or stabilisation, but not necessarily recovery; many patients have persistent
papilloedema
, elevated intracranial pressure (ICP) and persistent visual field deficits.
Improve
Complications
The principal concern in patients with IIH regards the possibility of irreversible vision loss.
The
visual field loss
is due to post-
papilloedema
optic atrophy.
The peripheries of vision are typically affected first with predominantly nerve fibre bundle type defects.
Symptomatic patients with extensive field loss and severe papilloedema should be considered for a surgical procedure emergently.
Community and clinic-based studies suggest that permanent severe visual loss occurs in about 10% of patients.
Improve
Prognosis
The disease often follows a protracted course of months to years. In some cases, it is self-limiting. Recurrence may occur in 25% of patients after recovery from IIH or after a period of prolonged stability.
Permanent severe visual loss is the major morbidity associated with idiopathic intracranial hypertension (10%).
Risk factors for poor visual outcome include:
Increased visual loss at presentation
Rapid development of visual loss
High grade
papilloedema
Transient visual obscurations
Improve
References
Patient.info - Idiopathic intracranial hypertension review
Neurology
Idiopathic intracranial hypertension