Transverse myelitis
Transverse myelitis
Transverse myelitis is a rare neuro-immune condition that causes focal inflammation of the spinal cord. A typical patient presents with acute or subacute symptoms below the level of the lesion, including sensory impairment, motor weakness and bladder or bowel dysfunction. The causes of transverse myelitis are heterogeneous. It can occur as an independent post-infectious complication but also as part of the neuroinflammatory disease spectrum that includes
multiple sclerosis
and or neuromyelitis optica spectrum disorder. The course and prognosis of transverse myelitis are variable depending on the cause.
Last updated: 1
st
January 2025
Epidemiology
Incidence: 0.50 cases per 100,000 person-years
Peak incidence: 30-40 years
Sex ratio: 1:1
Condition
Relative
incidence
Cervical spondylitic myelopathy
40.00
Multiple sclerosis
20.00
Guillain-Barre syndrome
4.00
Transverse myelitis
1
<1
1-5
6+
16+
30+
40+
50+
60+
70+
80+
Aetiology
The underlying cause varies greatly in transverse myelitis.
This is explored in the section on secondary transverse myelitis includes:
Infectious disease
Systemic inflammatory conditions
Multifocal central nervous system disease
In around 60% of patients, the cause is idiopathic however in 30-60% of these there is a reported GI, respiratory or systemic illness.
These are still considered idiopathic as causation can rarely be proven.
Epidemiology
Transverse myelitis has an incidence of one to four new cases per million people per year. It affects all ages with a bimodal peak between 10-19 years-old and 30-39 years-old. There are no links to sex or familial predisposition.
Improve
Pathophysiology
Due to the diverse spectrum of transverse myelitis, the pathophysiology greatly depends on the underlying cause.
This heterogeneity and the involvement of both white and grey matter means that transverse myelitis is classed as a mixed inflammatory disorder.
Inflammation affects myelin, oligodendrocytes, neurons and axons.
In the majority of cases, there is perivascular infiltration by lymphocytes and monocytes in the spinal cord lesion.
This is accompanied by axonal degeneration.
Improve
Clinical features
The presentation of transverse myelitis consists of motor, sensory and autonomic dysfunction with an acute or subacute onset below the level of the lesion. The symptoms are usually bilateral but can be unilateral. The most common first symptom is sensory change (39%), weakness (25%) and pain (22%) with autonomic dysfunction in the form of bladder and bowel symptoms being less frequent first symptoms.
Symptoms
Motor symptoms (80%)
Weakness of lower or all extremities (depending on the level of the lesion)
Hyperreflexia
Spasticity
Very acute cases may initially present with flaccidity and absence of reflexes due to spinal shock
Sensory symptoms (75%)
Pain
Paraesthesia
Dysaesthesia (unpleasant sensation upon touch)
Autonomic symptoms (60%)
Urinary frequency, urgency and retention
Bladder and bowl incontinence
Sexual dysfunction
Improve
Investigations
There are no NICE guidelines on transverse myelitis and the BMJ recommendations are based on the guidelines published in 2002 by the Transverse Myelitis Consortium Working Group.
The diagnostic criteria of transverse myelitis rely on the
presence
of motor, sensory and/or autonomic dysfunction localised to a spinal cord segment, in the
absence
of spinal cord compression. Investigations are used to rule out compression and then to find the
underlying cause.
Investigations
MRI spinal cord with and without gadolinium
To exclude spinal cord compression and confirm inflammation
In transverse myelitis, the cord appears swollen with gadolinium enhancement of the lesion
Lumbar puncture
To confirm the inflammation
CSF analysis for cell count, cell differential, protein level, IgG index and oligoclonal bands
Abnormal in approximately half of the patients with transverse myelitis.
After transverse myelitis is confirmed, investigations focus on determining the underlying cause of transverse myelitis which includes infection, systemic inflammatory disease,
multiple sclerosis
, neuromyelitis optica spectrum disorders and paraneoplastic myelopathies or, in the absence of these, idiopathic transverse myelitis.
Improve
Differential diagnosis
There are three main subcategories for the differential diagnosis of idiopathic transverse myelitis.
Other types of myelopathy (non-inflammatory or compressive)
Secondary transverse myelitis
Non-myelopathic disorders
Other types of myelopathy
Compressive myelopathy e.g. disc herniation, compression fractures, epidural masses
Similarities: clinical features indistinguishable from transverse myelitis.
Differences: MRI would show cord compression.
Noninflammatory myelopathy e.g. vascular, metabolic and radiation myelopathy or neoplasms
Similarities: clinical features similar to transverse myelitis.
Differences: symptom onset is important in differentiating between transverse myelitis and non-inflammatory myelopathy. For example, a hyperacute onset favours spinal stroke whereas a chronic onset favours metabolic myelopathy. Leucocytosis in CSF and the presence of gadolinium-enhancing lesions have
low
diagnostic accuracy for differentiating between transverse myelitis and non-inflammatory myelopathy.
Secondary transverse myelitis includes the following:
CNS inflammatory demyelinating disorders e.g.
multiple sclerosis
and neuromyelitis optica spectrum disorders
Systemic inflammatory disorders e.g. SLE or Sjogren syndrome
Infectious causes e.g. enteroviruses, herpes virus, HIV
Paraneoplastic syndromes
Similarities: clinical features can be indistinguishable from transverse myelitis with the addition of further symptoms relating to each condition mentioned.
Differences: brain MRI, antibody testing, CSF analysis and infection screens are used to differentiate between all the conditions mentioned.
Non-myelopathic disorders
This includes acute inflammatory demyelinating polyneuropathy (
Guillain-Barre syndrome
)
Similarities: present with similar progressive sensory and motor symptoms
Differences: normal spinal cord MRI with potential enhancement/enlargement of spinal roots in Guillain Barre, CSF has elevated protein but normal WBC. Electromyogram demonstrates peripheral abnormalities that are usually normal in myelopathies.
Improve
Management
A typical patient with acute idiopathic transverse myelitis would be managed in a secondary setting using high dose IV methylprednisolone in conjunction with supportive care and rehabilitation. There are no NICE guidelines for transverse myelitis, the following management approach is based on BMJ and UpToDate recommendations.
Acute management
IV methylprednisolone once a day for 3-5 days
There have not been any controlled trials of corticosteroids in transverse myelitis and the basis for this is extrapolated from the management of
multiple sclerosis
flares and there is strong evidence to support its use.
For patients not responding to glucocorticoids: plasmapheresis of 1.1 to 1.5 plasma volumes exchanged, once every two days for ten days.
Supportive care
Patients with cervical transverse myelitis may need critical care team involvement due to a risk of neurogenic respiratory failure.
Acute urinary retention is managed by catheterization.
Deep vein thrombosis prophylaxis
Acute rehabilitation which includes passive and active physiotherapy to maintain range of movement, manage spasms and decrease the risk of contractures.
For patients with secondary transverse myelitis, acute management is the same with the addition of therapy targeting the underlying condition on an ongoing basis if needed.
Improve
Complications
The following are the main complications for transverse myelitis:
Multiple sclerosis
: patients who develop acute complete transverse myelitis have at least a 5-10% chance of developing multiple sclerosis.
Motor weakness: following the acute phase, approximately 60% of patients are left with a motor deficit that requires physiotherapy and may decrease over time.
Spasticity: this often accompanies chronic weakness and is managed using oral drugs like baclofen if severe.
Neuropathic pain: pain that persists is often treated with anticonvulsants or tricyclic antidepressant drugs.
Bladder dysfunction: this can persist past the acute stage and may include urinary incontinence or retention which may require treatment.
Improve
Prognosis
Recovery
Most patients make a partial or complete recovery which starts within three months and continues over several years.
For around 40% of patients, there remains some disability.
Recurrence
Most patients with idiopathic transverse myelitis only have one instance of the disease.
The recurrence rate is between 25-33%.
In patients with secondary transverse myelitis, the recurrence rate is closer to 70%.
Improve
Neurology
Transverse myelitis