Transient ischaemic attack
Transient ischaemic attack
A transient ischaemic attack (TIA), as the name suggests, is a brief period of neurological deficit due to a vascular cause, typically lasting less than an hour.
The original definition of a TIA was time-based: a sudden onset of a focal neurologic symptom and/or sign lasting less than 24 hours, brought on by a transient decrease in blood flow. However, this has now changed as it is recognised that even short periods of ischaemia can result in pathological changes to the brain. Therefore, a new '
tissue-based'
definition is now used:
a transient episode of neurologic dysfunction caused by focal brain, spinal cord, or retinal ischaemia, without acute infarction.
#link13
Patients often use the term 'mini-
stroke
' for TIAs.
Last updated: 23
rd
July 2024
Epidemiology
Incidence: 230.00 cases per 100,000 person-years
Peak incidence: 70+ years
Sex ratio: more common in males 1.3:1
<1
1-5
6+
16+
30+
40+
50+
60+
70+
80+
Aetiology
The aetiology of Transient Ischaemic Attack (TIA) is multifactorial, encompassing both modifiable and non-modifiable risk factors. It is essential to identify these causative factors to guide clinical management and preventative strategies.
Non-Modifiable Risk Factors
Age:
The likelihood of TIA increases with age, particularly in individuals over 60 years old.
Sex:
Males are slightly more prone to experiencing TIAs than females.
Race/Ethnicity:
People of African or Afro-Caribbean descent have a higher incidence rate of TIA compared to Caucasians due to a higher prevalence of hypertension and diabetes mellitus within these populations.
Genetics:
Family history plays a role in TIA risk, especially if first-degree relatives have experienced
stroke
or TIA at an early age.
Modifiable Risk Factors
Hypertension:
Chronic high blood pressure damages blood vessels leading to increased risk of clot formation and subsequent ischaemia.
Dyslipidaemia:
High levels of low-density lipoprotein (LDL) cholesterol contribute to atherosclerosis, narrowing arteries and increasing the risk of clot formation.
Cigarette smoking:
Smoking accelerates the process of atherosclerosis and promotes platelet aggregation, thereby elevating the risk for TIA.
Diabetes mellitus:
Poorly controlled diabetes can lead to damage in the lining of blood vessels, promoting atherosclerosis and thrombus formation.
Atrial fibrillation:
This irregular heart rhythm can lead to clot formation in the heart which can dislodge and travel to the brain, causing TIA.
Obesity:
Obesity often coexists with other risk factors such as hypertension, dyslipidaemia, and diabetes, thereby increasing the risk of TIA.
Sedentary lifestyle:
Lack of physical activity contributes to obesity and atherosclerosis, thereby predisposing to TIA.
Excessive alcohol consumption:
Heavy drinking raises blood pressure and increases the likelihood of clot formation.
Underlying Causes
The most common underlying cause of TIA is atherosclerosis - a condition characterised by plaque build-up within the arterial walls leading to narrowing or blockage. This can result in reduced blood flow or formation of a clot that may subsequently dislodge and travel to smaller cerebral vessels causing transient ischaemia. Other causes include cardioembolism due to conditions like atrial fibrillation or valvular heart disease; haematological disorders such as polycythaemia, thrombocythaemia or sickle cell disease; vasculitis; hypercoagulable states; arterial dissection; drug misuse especially cocaine; and paradoxical embolism in presence of patent foramen ovale.
Improve
Pathophysiology
Transient ischaemic attack (TIA) occurs due to a temporary disruption in cerebral blood flow, leading to transient neurological deficits without infarction. The pathophysiology involves a sequence of events culminating in reversible cerebral ischaemia.
Initially, an embolus or thrombus obstructs a cerebral artery. This occlusion impedes blood flow, reducing the supply of oxygen and glucose to downstream neurons. Neurons rely on aerobic metabolism; thus, diminished perfusion leads to anaerobic glycolysis, causing lactate accumulation and decreased ATP production.
The reduction in ATP impairs ion pumps such as the Na+/K+ ATPase. This results in ionic imbalances, specifically intracellular sodium and calcium accumulation. Elevated intracellular calcium activates destructive enzymes like proteases and lipases, which damage cellular structures including membranes and organelles.
Concurrently, excitotoxicity ensues due to excessive glutamate release from presynaptic neurons. Glutamate overstimulates NMDA receptors on postsynaptic neurons, exacerbating calcium influx and furthering neuronal injury through similar mechanisms of enzyme activation and oxidative stress.
The brain's autoregulatory mechanisms attempt to compensate for reduced perfusion by dilating collateral vessels. However, if these compensatory pathways are insufficient or delayed, the affected region experiences hypoperfusion long enough for clinical symptoms to manifest but short enough that tissue viability remains intact upon reperfusion.
Reperfusion typically occurs either spontaneously or via endogenous fibrinolytic activity dissolving the occlusive material. Restoration of blood flow halts the pathological cascade before irreversible damage occurs. Consequently, neurological deficits resolve as normal cellular function resumes.
This transient nature differentiates TIA from
stroke
where prolonged ischaemia leads to permanent neuronal death and infarction.
Improve
Clinical features
The clinical features are similar to those of a
stroke
, i.e. sudden onset, focal neurological deficit but, rather than persisting, the features resolve, typically within 1 hour.
Possible features include
unilateral weakness or sensory loss.
aphasia
or dysarthria
ataxia
,
vertigo
, or loss of balance
visual problems
sudden transient loss of vision in one eye (amaurosis fugax)
diplopia
homonymous hemianopia
Improve
Investigations
Neuroimaging
NICE
NICE recommend that CT brains should not be done '
unless there is clinical suspicion of an alternative diagnosis that CT could detect
'
MRI (including diffusion-weighted and blood-sensitive sequences)
is preferred to determine the territory of ischaemia, or to detect haemorrhage or alternative pathologies
it should be done on the same day as the specialist assessment if possible
Carotid imaging
atherosclerosis in the carotid artery
may be a source of emboli in some patients
all patients should therefore have an
urgent carotid doppler
unless they are not a candidate for carotid endarterectomy
Improve
Differential diagnosis
Differential diagnosis of Transient ischaemic attack (TIA) primarily includes three conditions: migraines with aura, seizures, and hypoglycaemia. These conditions can present similarly to TIA but have distinguishing characteristics that aid in differential diagnosis.
Migraine with Aura
Patients presenting with migraine with aura may experience visual disturbances or other neurological symptoms similar to those of a TIA. However, these symptoms typically precede the headache phase of a migraine and gradually increase over minutes, differing from the abrupt onset seen in TIA.
Duration:
Migraine auras usually last between 5-60 minutes which aligns with the typical duration of TIAs. However, migraines are generally followed by a headache which can last for several hours to days, unlike TIAs.
Symptom progression:
Migraines often present with a 'march' of symptoms whereas TIAs have an abrupt onset without progression.
Associated symptoms:
Nausea
,
vomiting
and photophobia are common in migraines but not in TIAs.
Seizures
Focal seizures can mimic TIAs as they may cause transient motor or sensory deficits. The differentiation lies in certain features unique to seizures.
Postictal phase:
Seizures are often followed by a postictal phase characterised by confusion or lethargy which is not seen after a TIA.
Tonic-clonic activity:
Generalised tonic-clonic activity may follow focal deficits suggesting seizure rather than TIA.
Symptom duration:
While the active phase of seizure might be brief, postictal symptoms can persist longer than the typical duration of a TIA.
Hypoglycaemia
Hypoglycaemia can cause neuroglycopenic symptoms mimicking a TIA. However, hypoglycaemia often presents with additional systemic symptoms not seen in TIAs.
Onset and resolution:
Both are typically more gradual in hypoglycaemia compared to the sudden onset and resolution seen in TIAs.
Associated symptoms:
Symptoms such as sweating, tremor, palpitations, hunger and behavioural changes suggest hypoglycaemia over TIA.
Blood glucose levels:
A low plasma glucose level at the time of symptoms supports a diagnosis of hypoglycaemia.
Improve
Management
Assessment and referral
Patients with acute focal neurological symptoms that resolve completely within 24 hours of onset (i.e. suspected TIA) should:
be given aspirin 300 mg immediately unless contraindicated
assessed urgently within 24 hours by a
stroke
specialist clinician
Examples of TIA mimics that require exclusion
hypoglycaemia
intracranial haemorrhage
all patients on anticoagulants or with similar risk factors should be admitted for urgent imaging to exclude haemorrhage
If a patient presents more than 7 days ago they should be seen by a stroke specialist clinician as soon as possible within 7 days.
The ABCD2 prognostic score has previously been used to risk stratify patients who present with a suspected TIA. However, data from studies have suggested it performs poorly and it is therefore no longer recommended.
Patients with suspected TIA should be assessed by a stroke specialist clinician before a decision on brain imaging
NICE
NICE recommend that CT brains should not be done '
unless there is clinical suspicion of an alternative diagnosis that CT could detect
'
an example exception would be when there is a concern about haemorrhage as the patient is taking anticoagulants
MRI (including diffusion-weighted and blood-sensitive sequences) is preferred to determine the territory of ischaemia, or to detect haemorrhage or alternative pathologies
it should be done on the same day as the specialist assessment if possible
Management of TIA
It should be remembered that patients who've had a TIA are at high risk of further vascular events, particularly in the first few days. This section covers management following a diagnosis, i.e. after being seen by a stroke specialist clinician.
Medication
Immediate antithrombotic therapy:
REF
patients with TIA or minor ischaemic stroke should be given antiplatelet therapy provided there is neither a contraindication nor a high risk of bleeding
for patients within 24 hours of onset of TIA or minor ischaemic stroke and with a low risk of bleeding, the following DAPT regimes should be considered:
clopidogrel
(initial dose 300 mg followed by 75 mg od) + aspirin (initial dose 300 mg followed by 75 mg od for 21 days) followed by monotherapy with clopidogrel 75 mg od
ticagrelor + clopidogrel is an alternative
if not appropriate for DAPT:
clopidogrel 300 mg loading dose followed by 75 mg od should be given
proton pump inhibitor therapy should be considered for DAPT
The different antithrombotic recommendations may seem confusing - it is helpful to think of 3 different phases for a typical patient:
Resolved TIA symptoms, awaiting specialist review within 24 hours
Reviewed by specialist, initial 21 days when at high risk of further events
Long-term secondary prevention after 21 days
Aspirin
Aspirin + Clopidogrel
Clopidogrel
If a patient has atrial fibrillation they should be anticoagulated as soon as intracranial haemorrhage has been excluded.
Lipid modification
high-intensity statin (such as atorvastatin 20-80 mg daily) - the aim of statin therapy is to reduce non-HDL cholesterol by more than 40%
Further investigation
Carotid imaging
atherosclerosis in the carotid artery may be a source of emboli in some patients
patients who are considered candidates for carotid intervention should have carotid imaging performed within 24 hours of assessment
carotid duplex ultrasound or either CT angiography or MR angiography
carotid endarterectomy is recommend if the patient has suffered a stroke or TIA in the carotid territory and is not severely disabled
NICE
should only be considered if the stenosis > 50% according to North American Symptomatic Carotid Endarterectomy Trial (NASCET) criteria
+ it should be noted that previous guidelines have used other reporting methods, that have resulted in different cut-offs, e.g. European Carotid Surgery Trial (ECST) with a cut-off of 70%
it should be performed as soon as possible within 7 days
Improve
References
NICE - 2019 Stroke and transient ischaemic attack in over 16s: diagnosis and initial management
Clinical Knowledge Summaries - Transient ischaemic attack
National Clinical Guideline for Stroke - 2023 National Clinical Guideline for Stroke
RCP - 2016 Stroke guidelines
Radiopaedia - Transient ischaemic attack
Neurology
Transient ischaemic attack