Atrophic vaginitis
Atrophic vaginitis
Atrophic vaginitis is a common condition caused by falling levels of circulating oestrogen, frequently seen in post-menopausal women. It causes thinning and drying of the vaginal mucosa, which leads to both urinary and sexual problems. It can have a significant impact on quality of life and will often respond well to simple therapies. Therefore, it is an important topic to discuss with women who have been through the menopause.
Last updated: 1
st
January 2025
Epidemiology
Incidence: 1000.00 cases per 100,000 person-years
Peak incidence: 50-60 years
Condition
Relative
incidence
Bacterial vaginosis
5.00
Vaginal candidiasis
4.00
Atrophic vaginitis
1
Lichen sclerosus
0.10
Endometrial cancer
0.03
<1
1-5
6+
16+
30+
40+
50+
60+
70+
80+
Pathophysiology
Atrophic vaginitis is caused by a reduction in levels of oestrogen in the body. It often occurs in post-menopausal women but can also be caused by other conditions, including;
Premature ovarian failure
Ovarian failure following chemotherapy and radiotherapy
Anti-oestrogenic medications such as tamoxifen and danazol
Postpartum changes in hormones
The changes seen in atrophic vaginitis are mainly related to changes in the vaginal tissues and local pH. The vaginal mucosa becomes drier, thinner and more easily broken, which can lead to epithelial irritation and inflammation.
The levels of glycogen production in the vagina fall, leading to a decrease in the numbers of lactobacilli which normally maintain the acidic environment of the vagina. Their absence allows an increasingly alkaline environment in which infection is more likely to develop.
Improve
Clinical features
Symptoms associated with atrophic vaginitis can be difficult for patients to discuss, so it is important to approach this topic in a sensitive manner.
Symptoms
Dryness of the vagina (57% of patients)
Local irritation (43% of patients)
This can present as pruritus, pressure and burning pain of the vagina.
Painful intercourse (22% of patients)
Vaginal bleeding, particularly post-coital bleeding or haematuria
Urinary symptoms
This can include increased frequency, recurrent urinary infections, painful urination, incontinence (both stress and urge) and pain on wiping after passing urine
Vaginal discharge
Usually white or yellow and occasionally malodorous
Signs
External examination
Reduced pubic hair
Loss of labial fat pad
Narrowing of vaginal introitus
Thinning of labia minora
Internal examination
Smooth, shiny vaginal mucosa with loss of skin folds
Dryness of mucosa
Loss of vaginal muscle tone
Erythema or bleeding
Improve
Differential diagnosis
Diagnosis of atrophic vaginitis will usually be clinical. Other conditions to exclude include:
Other causes of vaginal bleeding and post-menopausal bleeding should be considered, particularly sinister diagnoses such as
endometrial cancer
Genitourinary infections, such as
candidiasis
,
bacterial vaginosis
or trichomonas
These may be the primary diagnosis, or can co-exist with atrophic vaginitis
Other skin conditions such as
lichen sclerosus
or lichen planus
Local reaction to irritants such as soaps, clothing or washing powder
Improve
Management
Effective management will usually focus on oestrogen replacement. NICE guidance, updated in 2019, recommends that topical oestrogen should be the first line in management of isolated atrophic vaginitis.
Topical oestrogens
Treatment of choice in management of atrophic vaginitis in absence of any other post-menopausal symptoms
Available as creams, rings, pessaries.
Treatments will take around 3 weeks to have any effect, with maximal effect noticeable within 3 months of starting
Long-term topical oestrogens are considered safe, with no effect on endometrial proliferation
Systemic HRT
Can be used in patients with other post-menopausal symptoms
As with any HRT, side effects and risks need to be discussed with patients
Up to 25% of patients taking systemic HRT will also experience
vaginal dryness
, so may require topical oestrogens in addition.
Patients taking any hormonal replacement should be instructed to contact their GP if they experience vaginal bleeding.
Other options for management include topical lubricants and moisturisers.
Improve
Menopausal problems
Atrophic vaginitis