Bacterial vaginosis
Bacterial vaginosis
Bacterial vaginosis (BV) describes an overgrowth of predominately anaerobic organisms such as
Gardnerella vaginalis
. This leads to a consequent fall in lactic acid producing aerobic lactobacilli resulting in a raised vaginal pH.
Whilst BV is not a sexually transmitted infection it is seen almost exclusively in sexually active women.
Last updated: 1
st
January 2025
Epidemiology
Incidence: 5000.00 cases per 100,000 person-years
Peak incidence: 20-30 years
Condition
Relative
incidence
Bacterial vaginosis
1
Vaginal candidiasis
0.80
Trichomonas vaginalis
0.20
Atrophic vaginitis
0.20
<1
1-5
6+
16+
30+
40+
50+
60+
70+
80+
Clinical features
- The typical presentation of bacterial vaginosis is a woman complaining of an abnormal
vaginal discharge
with an unpleasant, 'fishy' odour
the odour is often more noticeable after sexual intercourse or during menstruation due to the alkaline nature of semen and menstrual blood
many women report the odour is particularly noticeable after washing with soap, which raises vaginal pH
approximately 50% of women with BV are asymptomatic
Characteristic vaginal discharge
thin, homogeneous, white-grey discharge that tends to coat the vaginal walls
discharge is typically non-irritating and non-inflammatory
volume of discharge varies but is often increased compared to normal physiological discharge
Absence of specific symptoms
unlike
candidiasis
or trichomoniasis, BV typically does not cause vulval or vaginal itching
absence of dysuria, dyspareunia, or abdominal pain
lack of vulvovaginal erythema or inflammation on examination
Associated complications if left untreated
increased susceptibility to sexually transmitted infections including HIV
increased risk of pelvic inflammatory disease
in pregnancy, associated with preterm birth, premature rupture of membranes, and postpartum endometritis
post-surgical complications following gynaecological procedures
Recurrent bacterial vaginosis
defined as ≥3 symptomatic episodes in 12 months
often occurs within 3 months of treatment
may be associated with new or multiple sexual partners
can significantly impact quality of life and psychological wellbeing
Improve
Diagnosis
Amsel's criteria for diagnosis of BV - 3 of the following 4 points should be present
thin, white homogenous discharge
clue cells on microscopy: stippled vaginal epithelial cells
vaginal pH > 4.5
positive whiff test (addition of potassium hydroxide results in fishy odour)
Improve
Differential diagnosis
Comparison of bacterial vaginosis and
Trichomonas vaginalis
Candidal vulvovaginitis
Typically presents with vulval itching, soreness and a thick, white, 'cottage cheese' discharge.
Discharge is usually odourless and not associated with a fishy smell.
Vulval erythema and oedema are common on examination, which are generally absent in bacterial vaginosis.
Vaginal pH remains normal (<4.5) in candidal infections, contrasting with the elevated pH seen in BV.
Microscopy reveals budding yeast or pseudohyphae rather than clue cells.
Trichomoniasis
Presents with a frothy, yellow-green
vaginal discharge
often accompanied by vulval irritation or dysuria.
A distinctive musty or unpleasant odour may be present but differs from the characteristic 'fishy' smell of BV.
Examination may reveal punctate cervical haemorrhages ('strawberry cervix'), which are not features of BV.
Vaginal pH is typically raised (>4.5), similar to BV; however, motile trichomonads can be identified on wet mount microscopy.
Physiological discharge
Normal vaginal discharge varies throughout the menstrual cycle and is typically clear or white without malodour.
Absence of associated symptoms such as itching, soreness or offensive odour helps distinguish physiological discharge from BV and other pathological causes.
Examination reveals no signs of inflammation or abnormal findings; investigations show normal flora without clue cells or pathogens.
Bacterial vaginosis should be distinguished from other causes of abnormal vaginal discharge by its characteristic malodorous thin discharge, lack of significant inflammation, elevated vaginal pH and presence of clue cells.
Improve
Management
Management
if the woman is asymptomatic, treatment is not usually required
CKS
e.g. picked up on a swab done for different reasons
exceptions include if a woman is undergoing a termination of pregnancy
if symptomatic: oral metronidazole for 5-7 days
CKS
70-80% initial cure rate
relapse rate > 50% within 3 months
a single oral dose of metronidazole  2g may be used if adherence may be an issue
the BNF suggests topical metronidazole or topical clindamycin as alternatives
if pregnant
CKS
results in an increased risk of preterm labour, low birth weight and chorioamnionitis, late miscarriage
it was previously taught that oral metronidazole should be avoided in the first trimester and topical clindamycin used instead. Recent guidelines however recommend that oral metronidazole is used throughout pregnancy
if asymptomatic: discuss with the woman's obstetrician if treatment is indicated
if symptomatic: either oral metronidazole for 5-7 days or topical treatment. The higher, stat dose of metronidazole mentioned above is not recommended
Improve
References
Clinical Knowledge Summaries - Management of bacterial vaginosis
Infectious diseases
Bacterial vaginosis