Miscarriage
Miscarriage
Around 30% of pregnancies (including unrecognised pregnancies) and 1 in 8 known pregnancies end in miscarriages, defined as the spontaneous loss of pregnancy before 24 weeks of gestation. Most miscarriages tend to occur in the first trimester. Miscarriage commonly presents with
vaginal bleeding
Â±
lower abdominal pain
.
Chromosomal abnormalities are the major cause of first trimester miscarriages, but in many cases, the cause is unknown. About 1% of the population have recurrent miscarriages (3 or more consecutive miscarriages).
Last updated: 9
th
January 2024
Epidemiology
Incidence: 350.00 cases per 100,000 person-years
Peak incidence: 30-40 years
Condition
Relative
incidence
Miscarriage
1
Ruptured ovarian cysts
0.14
Ectopic pregnancy
0.11
<1
1-5
6+
16+
30+
40+
50+
60+
70+
80+
Aetiology
In most cases, there is no identifiable cause for the miscarriage.
Some known causes of miscarriages include abnormal fetal development, maternal conditions, and uterine abnormalities.
Abnormal fetal development
Chromosomal and structural abnormalities have been identified after analysing pregnancy tissue from miscarriages. Chromosomal abnormalities are a common cause of first trimester miscarriages. Other genetic abnormalities have been identified that lead to problems in the development of the placenta or embryo.
Maternal conditions
Pre-existing conditions of the woman may be the cause for miscarriages.
Infections such as bacterial vaginosis have been identified to be associated with late miscarriages.
Antiphospholipid syndrome is present in 15% of women who experience recurrent miscarriages, in particular first trimester miscarriages.
Thrombophilia (factor V Leiden, prothrombin gene mutation) is another identified cause of recurrent miscarriages, commonly second trimester miscarriages.
Endocrine problems such as polycystic ovarian syndrome, thyroid disease, diabetes mellitus, and hyperprolactinaemia may also lead to miscarriages.
Genetic abnormalities in the parents may also lead to miscarriages. About 2-5% of miscarriages have been identified to have parents with chromosomal abnormalities.
Uterine conditions
Anatomical or structural abnormalities of the uterine may also cause miscarriages to occur.
Uterine abnormalities including septate, bicornuate, or acute uterus can affect the development of the growing fetus, making it incompatible for a viable pregnancy.
Cervical incompetence does not allow the normal development of the fetus.
Fibroids typically do not affect pregnancies, but a uterus may be distorted by fibroids to the extent that it is unable to accommodate the development of a healthy fetus.
Further miscarriages
Two identified risk factors of having another miscarriage are an increase in maternal age and previous miscarriages. There is a decline in the number and quality of the oocytes as women age.
There is a 93% risk of miscarriage in women aged 45 and older.
After three consecutive miscarriages, there is a 40% risk of a further miscarriage.
Other risk factors
Other risk factors for miscarriages include:
Environmental factors
High dose radiation
Heavy metal exposure
Paternal factors
Tight clothing (bottom) in males
Sperm abnormalities
Old paternal age
Lifestyle factors
Smoking
Stress
Obesity
Improve
Pathophysiology
A miscarriage occurs when the pregnancy isn't viable due to numerous reasons.
Vaginal bleeding
is caused by
Haemorrhage in the decidua basalis leading to necrosis and inflammation
Ovum is unable to continue to develop in the uterus
Initiates uterine contractions
Cervix begins to dilate causing the loss of fetus and pregnancy tissue.
If this occurs early prior to 12 weeks, a
complete miscarriage
is more likely as the placenta is unlikely to have been independently developed, thus being expelled together with the fetus.
If this occurs between 12-24 weeks, the gestation sac is more likely to rupture and the fetus then expelled while parts of the placenta remain in the uterus, classified as an
incomplete miscarriage
.
Improve
Classification
Miscarriages can be classified as follows:
Early miscarriage: < 13 weeks
Late miscarriage: 13-24 weeks
Miscarriages are also classified based on their clinical presentation and physical examination findings (pelvic and speculum examination).
Complete miscarriage
Both fetus and all pregnancy tissue have been expelled from the uterus
Bleeding stops and further treatment is not needed
Incomplete miscarriage
Fetus and parts of the membranes are expelled from the uterus
Placenta is not fully expelled and bleeding persists
Surgical management is often needed to remove the remaining products of conception
Missed miscarriage
Usually identified via ultrasound with a small for dates uterus
Fetus in the uterus that did not develop or has died
Often do not have typical clinical symptoms of pain or
vaginal bleeding
Threatened miscarriage
Viable pregnancy with symptoms (such as vaginal bleeding) and a
closed cervical os
75% of threatened miscarriages will settle
Carry a higher risk of preterm delivery and preterm rupture of membranes
Inevitable miscarriage
Non-viable pregnancy with vaginal bleeding and an
open cervical os
Progresses to an incomplete or complete miscarriage
Recurrent miscarriage
Occurs in 1% of patients
3 or more consecutive miscarriages
Offered a referral for further investigation
Improve
Clinical features
The clinical features of miscarriages vary based on what category of miscarriage it is. A missed miscarriage often does not present with any symptoms while other types of miscarriages often present with signs and symptoms.
Clinical features
Vaginal bleeding
Vary from brownish light spotting to heavy bright-red blood with clots
Occurs in 20-30% of pregnant women in the first trimester, where a prospective study showed that 12% of these women then had an early miscarriage.
Lower abdominal cramping pain
Vaginal fluid discharge/tissue discharge
Loss of pregnancy symptoms (eg. No more nausea/breast tenderness)
Lower back pain
Improve
Referral criteria
Patients should be referred based on their presenting signs and symptoms and urgency of the situation.
Immediate admission to hospital
Any sign of
haemodynamic instability
Immediate admission to early pregnancy assessment unit (EPAU) or out-of-hours gynaecology unit
Suspicion of
ectopic pregnancy
Referred to EPAU or out-of-hours gynaecology unit
Symptoms that indicate an early pregnancy problem (excluding abdominal pain, pelvic tenderness, cervical motion tenderness) and is > 6 weeks pregnant or unknown gestation
Any doubt of viability of the pregnancy
If the patient presents with bleeding but no pain and is < 6 weeks pregnant,
expectant management
should be considered.
Repeat pregnancy test after 7-10 days
Negative pregnancy test: miscarriage
Positive pregnancy test with persistent symptoms: referred to an EPAU or out-of-hours gynaecology unit
All women who have been referred to an EPAU should be followed up with the appropriate support afterwards.
All women who have experienced recurrent miscarriages should be offered a referral to a specialist gynaecologist clinic to further investigate the cause.
Improve
Investigations
Miscarriage is often suspected by its clinical presentation and confirmed by further investigation.
The most common investigation done is a
transvaginal ultrasound scan
to determine the location and viability of the pregnancy. If unable to determine the status of the fetus, a repeat scan will be done after a minimum of 7 days.
Other investigations that can be used are repeat
serum beta-human chorionic gonadotropin
(bhCG) levels to determine the trend of the hormone levels. bhCG levels will decrease after a miscarriage as it is produced by the placenta.
If an
ectopic pregnancy
as a differential diagnosis is suspected, a laparoscopy may be done.
Recurrent miscarriages are further investigated to identify any underlying cause. These investigations include:
Karyotyping to identify chromosomal abnormalities
Transvaginal ultrasound scans to identify structural or anatomical abnormalities
Blood tests
Antiphospholipid antibodies
Lupus anticoagulant
Improve
Differential diagnosis
Vaginal bleeding
and abdominal pain in early pregnancy have numerous differential diagnoses.
Ectopic pregnancy
is the most important differential diagnosis to rule out as it is a medical emergency.
Pregnancy-related differential diagnoses:
Ectopic pregnancy
Similarities: vaginal bleeding and lower abdominal pain
Differences: pain is usually unilateral, more severe, and before bleeding presents. The bleeding in an ectopic pregnancy also tends to be darker and less heavy. There is also cervical excitation in ectopic pregnancy.
Molar pregnancy
Similarities: vaginal bleeding and abdominal pain.
Differences: heavy and prolonged bleeding with clots Â± brown watery vaginal discharge. The uterus is large for its gestational dates. There are exaggerated symptoms of pregnancy such as extreme morning sickness.
Ruptured ovarian corpus luteum cyst
Unilateral peritonitic abdominal pain Â± vaginal bleeding
Ovarian torsion
Palpable adnexal or pelvis mass with
pelvic pain
Â± vaginal bleeding
Fibroid degeneration
Abdominal pain Â± vaginal bleeding, fever, abdominal swelling
Non-pregnancy-related differential diagnoses:
Cervical pathology
Cervicitis: inflammation of the cervix may cause vaginal bleeding
Cervical ectropion: presents with spotting and pain commonly during or after intercourse
Cervical polyps: presents with intermenstrual spotting, bleeding after intercourse, heavier period flow, and vaginal discharge
Cervical trauma: may cause bleeding
Cancers
: all may present with bleeding
Cervical cancer
Vulval cancer
Vaginal cancer
Haemorrhoids: may cause bleeding that is mistaken to be vaginal bleeding
Improve
Management
In the 2023 NICE guidelines, 3 types of management for miscarriage were discussed:
Expectant management
'Waiting for a spontaneous miscarriage'
First-line and involves waiting for 7-14 days for the miscarriage to complete spontaneously
If expectant management is unsuccessful then medical or surgical management may be offered
Some situations are better managed medically or surgically. NICE list the following:
increased risk of haemorrhage
she is in the late first trimester
if she has coagulopathies or is unable to have a blood transfusion
previous adverse and/or traumatic experience associated with pregnancy (for example, stillbirth, miscarriage or antepartum haemorrhage)
evidence of infection
Medical management:
missed miscarriage
oral mifepristone. Mifepristone is a progesterone receptor antagonist → weakening of attachment to the endometrial wall + cervical softening and dilation +  induction of uterine contractions
48 hours later, misoprostol (vaginal, oral or sublingual) unless the gestational sac has already been passed. Misoprostol is a prostaglandin analogue, binds to myometrial cells → strong myometrial contractions  → expulsion of products of conception
if bleeding has not started within 48 hours after misoprostol treatment, they should contact their healthcare professional
incomplete miscarriage
a single dose of misoprostol (vaginal, oral or sublingual)
women should be offered antiemetics and pain relief
a pregnancy test should be performed at 3 weeks
Surgical management
'Undergoing a surgical procedure under local or general anaesthetic'
The two main options are vacuum aspiration (suction curettage) or surgical management in theatre
Vacuum aspiration is done under local anaesthetic as an outpatient
- Surgical management is done in theatre under general anaesthetic. This was previously referred to as 'Evacuation of retained products of conception'
Improve
Complications
There are some complications that may occur after having a miscarriage.
Incomplete miscarriage
Retained products of conception
May require medical or surgical intervention
Haemorrhagic shock
Due to excessive bleeding
Medical emergency that needs replacement of blood lost
Infection
3% of women
Due to retained pregnancy tissue in the uterus
Psychological complications
Depression/anxiety
Follow-up should be arranged
Haemolytic disease of the newborn
Give anti-D immunoglobulin to rhesus-negative women who have had surgical intervention for their miscarriage
Do not give anti-D immunoglobulin to women who have only had medical management, a threatened, or complete miscarriage
Increased risk of having another miscarriage
40% risk of a future miscarriage after three consecutive miscarriages
Improve
References
NICE - 2023 Ectopic pregnancy and miscarriage: diagnosis and initial management
Women's health
Miscarriage