Insomnia is one of the most commonly reported problems in primary care, and can be associated with other physical and mental health complaints. In the DSM-V, insomnia is defined as difficulty initiating or maintaining sleep, or early-morning awakening that leads to dissatisfaction with sleep quantity or quality. This is despite adequate time and opportunity for sleep and results in impaired daytime functioning.

Insomnia may be considered acute or chronic. Acute insomnia is more typically related to a life event and resolves without treatment. Chronic insomnia may be diagnosed if a person has trouble falling asleep or staying asleep at least three nights per week for 3 months or longer.

Patients typically present with decreased daytime functioning, decreased periods of sleep (delayed sleep onset or awakening in the night) or increased accidents due to poor concentration. Often the partner's rest will also suffer. It is important to identify the aetiology of the insomnia, as management can differ.

The following features are associated with insomnia:
Female gender
Increased age
Lower educational attainment
Unemployment
Economic inactivity
Widowed, divorced, or separated status

Other risk factors include:
Alcohol and substance abuse
Stimulant usage
Medications such as corticosteroids
Poor sleep hygiene
Chronic pain
Chronic illness: patients with illnesses such as diabetes, CAD, hypertension, heart failure, BPH and COPD have a higher prevalence of insomnia than the general population.
Psychiatric illness: anxiety and depression are highly correlated with insomnia. People with manic episodes or PTSD will also complain of extended periods of sleeplessness.

Less common diagnostic factors may include:
Daytime napping
Enlarged tonsils or tongue
Micrognathia (small jaw) and retrognathia
Lateral narrowing of oropharynx

Investigations:
Diagnosis is primarily made through patient interview, looking for the presence of risk factors.
Sleep diaries and actigraphy may aid diagnosis. Actigraphy is a non-invasive method for monitoring motor activity.
Polysomnography is not routinely indicated. It may be considered in patients with suspected obstructive sleep apnoea or periodic limb movement disorder, or when insomnia is poorly responsive to conventional treatment.

Short-term management of insomnia:
Identify any potential causes e.g. mental/ physical health issues or poor sleep hygiene.
Advise the person not to drive while sleepy.
Advise good sleep hygiene: no screens before bed, limited caffeine intake, fixed bed times etc.
ONLY consider use of hypnotics if daytime impairment is severe.

There is good evidence for the efficacy of hypnotic drugs in short-term insomnia. However, there are many adverse effects e.g. daytime sedation, poor motor coordination, cognitive impairment and related concerns about accidents and injuries. In addition, tolerance to the hypnotic effects of benzodiazepines may be rapid (within a few days or weeks of regular use).

Guidance on using hypnotics:
The hypnotics recommended for treating insomnia are short-acting benzodiazepines or non-benzodiazepines (zopiclone, zolpidem and zaleplon).
Diazepam is not recommended but can be useful if the insomnia is linked to daytime anxiety.
Use the lowest effective dose for the shortest period possible.
If there has been no response to the first hypnotic, do not prescribe another. You should make the patient aware that repeat prescriptions are not usually given.
It is important to review after 2 weeks and consider referral for cognitive behavioural therapy (CBT).

Other sedative drugs (such as antidepressants, antihistamines, choral hydrate, clomethiazole and barbiturates) are not recommended for managing insomnia.
