Breast abscess
Breast abscess
Breast abscesses are a complication of infectious mastitis. They occur most commonly in breastfeeding women with mastitis, affecting an estimated 3-11 % of women in this group, but can also occur in non-lactating women and men. The infective organism is most commonly
Staphylococcus aureus
, and up to 50-60% of such cases have been reported to involve methicillin-resistant
Staphylococcus aureus
(MRSA). Aspiration with culture is both diagnostic (to guide antibiotic treatment), and therapeutic.
Last updated: 20
th
September 2023
Epidemiology
Incidence: 125.00 cases per 100,000 person-years
Peak incidence: 30-40 years
Condition
Relative
incidence
Breast abscess
1
Breast cancer
0.76
Breast fibroadenoma
0.26
Fat necrosis of the breast
0.03
<1
1-5
6+
16+
30+
40+
50+
60+
70+
80+
Aetiology
Breast abscesses are an infective process, and a variety of microorganisms are implicated.
Infectious mastitis and subsequent breast abscess are usually caused by
Staphylococcus aureus
(32%), over half of which now typically are methicillin-resistant
S. aureus
(MRSA).
Other implicated microorganisms include coagulase-negative
Staphylococcus
, diphtheroids and
Pseudomonas aeruginosa
.
However, up to 40% of breast abscesses may be polymicrobial.
Non-lactational abscesses are more common among obese women, smokers, and those with diabetes.
Amongst non-lactating women, nipple piercings are associated with a higher risk of breast abscess, which can be associated with distinct microorganisms such as Group B
Streptococcus
and
Mycobacterium
.
Improve
Pathophysiology
Milk stasis in lactating women, secondary to breastfeeding technique or a blocked duct, can cause mastitis.
Mastitis, in turn, may become infectious mastitis following bacterial contamination from the skin, and a complication of this is a breast abscess
Abscess formation involves the body creating a capsule of granulomatous tissue around the developing infection to attempt to contain it.
Non-lactational breast abscesses may be caused by duct ectasia, which is a thickening and widening of the mild duct generally seen in women aged 45-55, and that can cause mastitis and subsequent infection.
Improve
Clinical features
The stereotypical presentation of a breast abscess is a lactating woman, typically in the postpartum period, presenting with a painful, erythematous, fluctuant swelling in one quadrant of the breast. This is often accompanied by systemic symptoms such as
fever
and malaise. The condition frequently arises as a complication of mastitis that has been inadequately treated.
Local Features:
Tenderness and Pain:
Almost universally present and may be severe, causing significant discomfort to the patient.
Swelling:
A distinct area of swelling or lump can be palpated, which may be fluctuant, indicating the presence of pus.
Erythema and Warmth:
The overlying skin is typically red and warm to touch.
Nipple Discharge
:
Some patients might present with purulent or serous discharge from the nipple.
Nipple Retraction:
Rarely, an abscess located deep or near the nipple may cause retraction of the nipple.
Skin Changes:
In longstanding cases, the overlying skin might appear thinned, and in severe cases, a sinus or fistula may develop.
Lymphadenopathy:
Enlarged and tender axillary lymph nodes can often be palpated due to reactive changes.
Systemic Features:
Fever and Chills:
A significant proportion of patients present with high-grade fever and chills indicating a systemic inflammatory response.
Malaise and Fatigue:
These are common accompanying symptoms due to the body's response to infection.
Tachycardia:
An increased heart rate might be observed, especially in cases where sepsis is developing.
Non-puerperal abscesses
Though commonly seen in lactating women, abscesses can also present in non-lactating women, especially in those with predisposing factors such as diabetes, immunosuppression, or nipple piercings.
Improve
Investigations
Blood tests to help assess severity of infection as well as imaging are required to work up patients with suspected breast abscesses.
Blood tests:
Full blood count
U&E
CRP
Blood cultures if clinically unwell/septic.
Consider pregnancy test if not a breast-feeding woman.
Imaging:
Breast ultrasound to characterise abscess.
Mammogram to rule out underlying breast lesion.
Microbiology
Culture of needle aspirate of abscess to inform antibiotic choice
Milk culture may be helpful
Improve
Differential diagnosis
The key differential diagnoses involve non-infectious benign breast diseases. Malignancy must be excluded.
Galactocele
Milk cyst in lactating women. Not usually accompanied by localised pain or systemic signs of infection.
Fibrocystic breasts
Typically multi-focal lumps with monthly pain around menses, improving with menstruation. Not accompanied by systemic illness. Distinguished on ultrasound.
Fibroadenoma
Benign breast tumours, distinguishable from breast abscess on ultrasound. No systemic illness.
Invasive
breast cancer
Malignant breast lesions may present similarly, and are distinguished on mammogram and ultrasound with biopsy of the lesion to confirm pathology.
Fat necrosis
Usually secondary to breast trauma resulting in a firm round tender lump, usually without erythema. Biopsy confirms diagnosis.
Cellulitis
Skin infection that may present with painful, erythematous area of skin with associated signs of systemic infection.
TB mastitis.
A rare presentation of TB, often mimicking and possibly co-existing with breast abscess. Systemic features of TB including indicative history, and a positive Mantoux test.
Improve
Management
Key principles of management are drainage of pus in the abscess with appropriate antibiotic treatment.
1. Surgical management
First line management is needle aspiration of the abscesses under 5cm, under local anaesthetic and usually with ultrasound guidance. This may need to be repeated daily over a period of 5-7 days.
Larger abscesses, or those that do not resolve with needle aspiration, will need surgical incision and drainage with washout, or percutaneous drainage with indwelling catheter.
2. Adjuvant medical management
Aspiration must be accompanied by antibiotic treatment. If MRSA has been ruled out and the patient is systemically well then appropriate oral antibiotics may be used e.g. flucloxacillin or dicloxacillin.
In penicillin allergic patients, or if MRSA grown on culture aspirate, doxycycline or clindamycin are effective.
Systemically unwell patients may need intravenous antibiotics e.g. Vancomycin.
3. Breast emptying in lactational abscesses
Breast milk should continue to be expressed in the presence of a breast abscess as this provides symptomatic relief from breast engorgement.
If suckling is painful especially during the acute period, or following surgical intervention, then the mother should be encouraged to express manually or using a pump to avoid breast engorgement.
Improve
Breast surgery
Breast abscess