Breast fibroadenoma
Breast fibroadenoma
Fibroadenoma is a type of benign breast tumour and is the most common cause of breast mass, frequently seen in women of reproductive age. The incidence of fibroadenoma in women is reported as between 7% to 13%. Fibroadenomas are sometimes colloquially referred to as breast mice. This condition is most frequently managed conservatively, with reassurance, as it does not progress to breast cancer and frequently may shrink over time.
Last updated: 1
st
January 2025
Epidemiology
Incidence: 33.00 cases per 100,000 person-years
Peak incidence: 20-30 years
Condition
Relative
incidence
Breast abscess
3.79
Breast fibroadenoma
1
Fat necrosis of the breast
0.12
<1
1-5
6+
16+
30+
40+
50+
60+
70+
80+
Aetiology
Fibroadenoma is most common in young women of reproductive age and its incidence in men is rare.
Fibroadenoma is most common
During menses
During pregnancy
Whilst using combined oral contraceptives.
The exact aetiology is unknown but there is belief that given this distribution, it is related to the sensitivity of breast tissue to oestrogen.
There is also believed to be a genetic component including MED12 (mediator complex subunit 12) gene related to fibroadenoma.
Improve
Pathophysiology
Fibroadenomas are benign and do not mutate into malignancy. Though they represent a proliferation of breast tissue, fibroadenomas do not exhibit any pleomorphism.
Fibroadenomas arise from the terminal duct lobular unit. They are comprised of both stromal tissue and epithelial connective tissue cells. As they contains two different cellular types, they are considered biphasic.  On histological assessment, they appear as sheets of epithelial cells in a honeycomb or antler-like pattern.
The stromal and epithelial cells can be arranged in two patterns:
Pericanalicular: stromal cells proliferate surrounding epithelial structures
Intracanaliccular:  stromal cells proliferate invaginating the glandular tissue
Improve
Clinical features
It is possible that a patient with fibroadenoma may experience no symptoms and be fully asymptomatic, including not recognising presence of the fibroadenoma.
In patients who are symptomatic, the fibroadenoma mass is:
Painless / non-tender
Mobile / non-tethered
Smooth
Well-circumscribed
Solitary
2-3 cm in diameter (except for giant fibroadenoma, which comprises 1% of breast masses and can measure up to 5cm)
Fibroadenomas are most often found within the upper outer quadrant of the breast. There are not usually any overlying skin changes.
Improve
Investigations
As per NICE recommendations, an urgent 2-week-wait suspected cancer referral should be made for patients aged 30 and over who have an unexplained
breast lump
with or without pain. A non-urgent referral should be considered in patients under 30 with an unexplained breast lump with or without pain.
Often trusts have a 'one-stop' clinic where clinical examination, imaging and pathology investigations are offered. Based on these, a patient will have a risk assessment including an examination score graded from P1 (normal) - P5 (malignant), as well as imaging scores from M1-M5 or U1-U5, depending on modality, and pathology scores from B1-B5.
Where imaging is recommended:
Ultrasound is used predominantly in younger women, under age 35 and in men, as it has greater sensitivity in denser breast tissue.
Mammograms are preferred in women 35 and over.
MRI is not routinely used.
Histology can be offered in the form of core biopsy, which allows for a full histopathological assessment, or a fine-needle-aspiration-cytology (FNAC), in which only cytology can be offered.
Improve
Differential diagnosis
Possible differential diagnoses:
Fibrocystic changes
Similarities: smooth lumpy changes in the breast, most prominent in reproductive years, related to menses
Differences: usually presents with multiple bilateral lumps
Infection (e.g. mastitis)
Similarities: localised breast swelling, most often unilateral
Differences: associated with redness, warmth, pain and systemic symptoms including fever
Breast cancer
Similarities: unilateral breast mass
Differences: can have overlying skin changes, including affecting nipple. Can be associated with discharge and pain. If progressive, can have associated systemic/constitutional symptoms
Breast cyst
Similarities: distinct, mobile round or oval masses, with onset that can be related to menses
Differences: age of onset of breast cyst is older, at 35-50 years old. May present with nipple discharge and pain/tenderness
Phyllodes tumor
Similarities: also presents as smooth, firm, well circumscribed mass
Differences: age of onset of phyllodes tumour is older, at 40-50 years old. Phyllodes tumours are faster growing.
Improve
Management
According to NICE recommendations, an asymptomatic fibroadenoma does not require treatment or follow-up. However, NICE recommends that growth in fibroadenoma size or other changes should warrant repeat investigation. NICE recommends symptomatic fibroadenomas can be removed if troublesome.
Options for removal include:
Surgical lumpectomy or excisional biopsy may be used to remove the mass (the mass can then undergo additional histopathological analysis)
Vacuum-assisted biopsy
Cryoablation, in which the application of low temperatures is used to destroy breast tissue (this is offered after histological/cytological confirmation)
High intensity focussed ultrasound for ablation of fibroadenoma tissue (still in preliminary use, as suggested by NICE)
Indications for surgical removal may include large size, continued growth of mass or patient request. There is no consensus guidance on surgical treatment of fibroadenoma, though giant fibroadenomas (mass greater than 500 g or size larger than 5 cm) are generally removed.
Improve
Breast surgery
Breast fibroadenoma