Cyclical mastalgia
Cyclical mastalgia
Cyclical mastalgia, a prevalent condition among women of reproductive age, is characterized by recurrent
breast pain
and tenderness that typically follows a cyclic pattern in parallel with the menstrual cycle.
Clinically, patients may present with bilateral or unilateral breast discomfort, heaviness, or swelling that usually subsides post-menstruation. The pain is predominantly located in the upper outer quadrant and can radiate to the axilla.
Diagnosis entails thorough history taking and physical examination to rule out other potential causes such as fibrocystic changes or malignancy. Adjunct imaging modalities like mammography or ultrasound may be employed for further evaluation if warranted.
Management options include conservative measures (e.g., supportive bras), lifestyle modifications, pharmacological interventions (e.g., nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs, oral contraceptives), and hormonal therapies (e.g., danazol).
Last updated: 1
st
January 2025
Epidemiology
Incidence: 1000.00 cases per 100,000 person-years
Peak incidence: 30-40 years
<1
1-5
6+
16+
30+
40+
50+
60+
70+
80+
Aetiology
The aetiology is multifactorial, with hormonal fluctuations playing a pivotal role in its pathophysiology. Specifically, an imbalance between estrogen and progesterone levels during the luteal phase results in increased mammary glandular tissue proliferation and oedema.
Improve
Clinical features
Clinical features
It varies in intensity according to the phase of the menstrual cycle
Cyclical
mastalgia
is not usually associated with point tenderness of the chest wall (more likely to be Tietze's syndrome).
The underlying cause is difficult to pinpoint, examination should focus on identifying focal lesions (such as cysts) that may be treated to provide symptomatic benefit.
Improve
Management
Management
Women should be advised to wear a supportive bra.
Conservative treatments include standard oral and topical analgesia
flaxseed oil and evening primrose oil are sometimes used but neither are recommended by NICE
If the pain has not responded to conservative measures after 3 months, and is affecting the quality of life or sleep, then referral should be considered
Hormonal agents such as bromocriptine and danazol may be more effective. However, many women discontinue these therapies due to adverse effects.
Improve
References
Clinical Knowledge Summaries - https://cks.nice.org.uk/breast-pain-cyclical
Breast surgery
Cyclical mastalgia