Atopic eruption of pregnancy
Atopic eruption of pregnancy
Atopic eruption of
pregnancy
(AEP) is the commonest dermatosis of pregnancy, accounting for half of all dermatoses in this patient group. It is a benign condition that is treated symptomatically with topical creams and emollients. Incidence is higher amongst women with a past medical or family history of atopy, and the pathogenetic mechanisms seem to relate to pregnancy-related immune changes and reduced cytokine production.
Last updated: 1
st
January 2025
Epidemiology
Incidence: 9.00 cases per 100,000 person-years
Most commonly see in infants
Condition
Relative
incidence
Intrahepatic cholestasis of
pregnancy
3.33
Polymorphic eruption of pregnancy
1.33
Atopic eruption of pregnancy
1
Pemphigoid gestationis
0.01
<1
1-5
6+
16+
30+
40+
50+
60+
70+
80+
Pathophysiology
AEP is thought to be related to
pregnancy
-related immune changes.
Incidence is higher amongst women with a family or personal history of atopic disease, suggesting an immune-mediated reaction.
Reduced production of Th1 cytokines (interleukin-2, -12, interferon gamma), in concert with elevated secretion of Th2 cytokines (IL-4, IL-10) have been proposed as causal mechanisms.
There are no hallmark histological findings, and immunofluorescence is negative.
Improve
Clinical features
AEP tend to affect early
pregnancy
, with symptoms presenting in the first or second trimester in 75% of cases.
Patients will present with symptoms of pruritis and discomfort in the areas affected
On general examination, the eruption may be found to affect all parts of the body, including the face, hands, soles of the feet
There is a tendency for flexural areas to be more affected however
On inspection, there may be:
Eczematous features (48%) - erythematous areas interspersed with other dry, scaly, excoriated areas
Papules, which may be grouped or widespread
Prurigo lesions (31%) - small, raised, hard nodular lesions
Vital signs should be normal, and with no fever
Improve
Investigations
AEP is a clinical diagnosis, and no testing is required. However, it may be necessary in some cases to ensure that other diagnoses have been ruled out.
Blood tests
Clinically mild AEP will likely be managed solely in primary care and no blood tests are necessary. However, if symptoms are widespread or very pronounced, performing blood tests may be prudent to rule out other causes.
Full blood count and CRP
Useful to rule out superimposed infection
AEP should not be accompanied by an elevation in infection markers
Liver function tests and bile acids
To rule out intrahepatic cholestasis of
pregnancy
.
LFTs and bile acids normal in AEP
Improve
Differential diagnosis
Other dermatoses of
pregnancy
are import to exclude, as although much rarer they require more urgent management.
Polymorphic eruption of pregnancy
The second most common pregnancy-related skin condition and also benign and self-limiting.
Presents later that AEP, commonly in the third trimester
Typical features include pruritic, erythematous papules found principally on the abdomen and with periumbilical sparing.
Intrahepatic cholestasis of pregnancy
A potentially serious condition associated with increased risk of stillbirth and premature labour
Presents first with pruritis, and skin lesions follow afterwards
Blood tests show raised bile acids, and possibly deranged liver function tests in contrast to AEP where blood tests should all be normal
Pemphigoid gestationis
Otherwise known as pregnancy-related bullous pemphigoid
Much rarer than the other dermatoses of pregnancy
Urticarial plaques and papules typically develop around the umbilicus, which form to develop into bullae which then spread to other parts of the body. AEP tends to develop around flexural areas, however, and bullae are not a feature.
An auto-immune condition, diagnosed by direct immunofluorescence of perilesional skin, and managed with topical and/or oral corticosteroids
Improve
Management
Treatment of atopic eruption of
pregnancy
is symptomatic, and management is for the most part within primary care.
Oral anti-histamines can help relieve pruritis
Topical therapies include emollients, 1% menthol in aqueous cream and steroid cream
Oatmeal baths, sunlight, and wearing light airy clothes may also help alleviate symptoms
Patients should be reassured that symptoms resolve spontaneously following delivery of the baby.
A referral to a tertiary
dermatology
or obstetric centre may be made in rare cases with very extreme, widespread, or persistent symptoms for investigation to rule out serious differentials.
Improve
Dermatology
Atopic eruption of pregnancy