Impetigo
Impetigo
Impetigo is a highly contagious superficial bacterial skin infection, predominantly caused by
Staphylococcus aureus
and
Streptococcus pyogenes
. It primarily affects children but can occur in individuals of any age.
Clinically, impetigo presents as non-bullous or bullous forms. The non-bullous type is characterised by vesicles that rupture to form honey-coloured crusts, typically on the face and extremities. Bullous impetigo manifests with larger fluid-filled blisters that may rupture, leaving erosions with a characteristic scaling rim. Diagnosis is usually clinical, supported by Gram stain and culture when necessary to identify the causative organism and guide antibiotic therapy.
Topical antibiotics such as fusidic acid or mupirocin are first-line treatments for limited lesions, whereas oral antibiotics like flucloxacillin or erythromycin are indicated for more extensive involvement. Preventive measures include maintaining good hygiene practices and avoiding close contact with infected individuals.
Last updated: 25
th
July 2024
Epidemiology
Incidence: 250.00 cases per 100,000 person-years
Peak incidence: 1-5 years
Sex ratio: 1:1
Condition
Relative
incidence
Impetigo
1
Shingles
0.72
Eczema herpeticum
0.004
<1
1-5
6+
16+
30+
40+
50+
60+
70+
80+
Pathophysiology
Spread is by direct contact with discharges from the scabs of an infected person. The bacteria invade skin through minor abrasions and then spread to other sites by scratching. Infection is spread mainly by the hands, but indirect spread via toys, clothing, equipment and the environment may occur. The incubation period is between 4 to 10 days.
Improve
Clinical features
The infection can develop anywhere on the body but lesions tend to occur on the face, flexures and limbs not covered by clothing.
Features
'golden', crusted skin lesions typically found around the mouth
very contagious
Improve
Management
Limited, localised disease
NICE now recommend
hydrogen peroxide 1% cream
for 'people who are not systemically unwell or at a high risk of complications'
the change was announced in 2020 by NICE and Public Health England and seems aimed at cutting antibiotic resistance
the evidence base shows it is just as effective at treating non-bullous impetigo as a topical antibiotic
topical antibiotic creams:
topical fusidic acid
topical mupirocin should be used if fusidic acid resistance is suspected
MRSA is not susceptible to either fusidic acid or retapamulin. Topical mupirocin should, therefore, be used in this situation
Extensive disease
oral flucloxacillin
oral erythromycin if penicillin-allergic
School exclusion
children should be excluded from school until the lesions are crusted and healed or 48 hours after commencing antibiotic treatment
Improve
References
Clinical Knowledge Summaries - Impetigo guidelines
Dermatology
Impetigo