Cholangiocarcinoma
Cholangiocarcinoma
Cholangiocarcinoma is a
cancer
that arises in the bile ducts either within (intrahepatic) or outside the liver (extrahepatic). Understanding where in the bile ducts the cancer is allows us to understand the symptoms and consider management options which vary between the sites.
Advancing age, sex (more common in males), smoking and chronic inflammation of the bile ducts are a few of the most important risk factors for cholangiocarinoma. These will be discussed in detail below.
Although relatively rare, cholangiocarinomas are frequently missed as symptoms are often vague. Early diagnosis is key as surgery in the early stage of the disease is the only chance of a cure.
Once diagnosed, there is a progressive deterioration with average survival of 12-18 months.
Last updated: 1
st
January 2025
Epidemiology
Incidence: 1.70 cases per 100,000 person-years
Peak incidence: 70+ years
Sex ratio: more common in males 1.2:1
Condition
Relative
incidence
Acute cholecystitis
82.35
Ascending cholangitis
29.41
Pancreatic
cancer
8.82
Hepatocellular carcinoma
5.29
Cholangiocarcinoma
1
<1
1-5
6+
16+
30+
40+
50+
60+
70+
80+
Aetiology
Risk factors
Primary sclerosing
cholangitis
(PSC):
The most significant risk factor in the UK, with a markedly increased lifetime risk compared to the general population.
Biliary tract disorders:
Chronic biliary inflammation or injury, including choledochal cysts and Caroli disease.
Hepatolithiasis (intrahepatic bile duct stones).
Parasitic infection:
Liver fluke infestation (Opisthorchis viverrini, Clonorchis sinensis) is a major cause in endemic regions but rare in the UK.
Cirrhosis:
Any cause of cirrhosis, including viral hepatitis (particularly hepatitis B and C), increases risk.
Toxins and exposures:
Thorotrast exposure (historical radiological contrast agent).
Asbestos and nitrosamine exposure.
Metabolic conditions:
Diabetes mellitus
Obesity
Non-alcoholic fatty liver disease
Epidemiological associations
Cholangiocarcinoma is slightly more common in males than females in the UK and globally.
Incidence increases with age; most cases occur after 50 years.
Genetic and familial factors
Familial clustering is rare but has been reported; no specific hereditary syndromes have been clearly established as causative.
Sporadic cases
A significant proportion of cases arise without identifiable risk factors.
Improve
Pathophysiology
Like all cancers, cholangiocarcinoma occurs when cells develop mutations in their DNA leading them to grow out of control. Chronic inflammation (for example in patients with PSC) leads to an increased risk that mutations will occur. Most cholangiocarcinomas will arise from biliary epithelium and are considered to be adenocarcinomas.
Cholangiocarcinomas can metastasise in 2 main ways:
Through the lymph system
Through the blood
The most common places for bile duct
cancer
to spread are the lungs, liver, regional lymph nodes and the peritoneum.
As mentioned previously, cholangiocarcinomas can be divided into intrahepatic and extrahepatic cancers. Extrahepatic bile duct cancers can be further divided into-
Perihilar bile duct cancers
Most common
Develop just outside the liver where the left and right hepatic ducts meet
Tumours occurring at the junction where the hepatic ducts meet to form the common hepatic duct are known as Klatskin tumours
Distal bile duct cancers
Tumours occur where the common bile duct passes through the pancreas and into the small intestine
Often hard to distinguish from a pancreatic malignancy
Improve
Clinical features
The symptoms of cholangiocarcinoma often depend on the location of the tumour. Intrahepatic bile duct cancers do not usually cause any specific symptoms and therefore diagnosed at a more advanced stage.
Both intrahepatic and extrahepatic cholangiocarcinomas can present with
vague
symptoms including-
Anorexia
Weight loss
Fevers (20%)
Lethargy
Abdominal pain (30%)
Most commonly right upper quadrant
Symptoms that indicate biliary obstruction and more common in patients with extrahepatic bile duct
cancer
-
Jaundice
Pruritus
(65%)
Pale-coloured stools
Dark urine
Courvoisier's law
States that in the presence of jaundice and a palpable gallbladder, malignancy of the biliary tree or pancreas should be
strongly
suspected as the cause is
unlikely
to be gallstones
Improve
Investigations
Multiple investigations are used in patients with suspected cholangiocarcinoma.
Blood tests
No blood test is diagnostic
Liver function tests (LFTs)
An obstructive picture is common (elevated alkaline phosphatase, gamma-GT and bilirubin)
Aminotransferases are not usually affected
Prolonged PT time
Tumour markers
Carbohydrate antigen (CA) 19-9 and carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA) levels may be elevated
Imaging
Ultrasound scan (USS)
Can be used as to identify obstruction and ductal dilatation
MRCP (magnetic resonance cholangiopancreatography)
Gives detailed images of the liver, bile ducts, gallbladder, pancreas, and pancreatic duct
ERCP (endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography)
Invasive test
Allows biopsies to be taken whilst giving a detailed view of the biliary system
Percutaneous transhepatic cholangiography (PTC)
Contrast is injected into the bile ducts in the liver and x-rays are taken
Biopsies can be taken
Stents can be placed this way if ERCP has failed
Despite the increased risk of cholangiocarcinoma in patients with primary sclerosing
cholangitis
(PSC) , no screening test has been shown to be of benefit. However, due to the recognition of the importance of early detection, the British Society of Gastroenterology suggest patients with a
new
diagnosis of PSC should have a CA19-9 tumour marker test and imaging (USS/MRCP). If suspicious lesions are identified, an ERCP and biopsies are needed.
Patients should have LFTS and tumour markers checked every 6 months and imaging every 12 months. As before, any abnormalities will need further investigation.
NICE guidelines advise that patients presenting with an upper abdominal mass to be considered for an urgent USS in accordance with the 2 week wait referral system.
Improve
Differential diagnosis
The differential diagnoses for cholangiocarcinoma are wide and include the many causes of post-hepatic
jaundice
.
It is always key to consider malignancies:
Pancreatic
cancer
Courvoisier's sign may be present
Hepatocellular carcinoma
Raised tumour marker, alpha-fetoprotein is not associated with cholangiocarcinoma and could indicate a primary liver cancer
Inflammation and infections need to be considered including:
Acute cholecystitis
/
Ascending cholangitis
.
Aminotransferases are usually normal in cholangiocarcinoma but will be elevated in cholangitis
Acute hepatitis
Aminotransferases will be markedly raised
PSC
Primary biliary cirrhosis
Raised alkaline phosphatase
Presence of antimitochondrial antibodies
Bile duct strictures
More common in patients with PSC
Improve
Staging
Staging is based on the
tumour, node and metastasis (TNM)
classification and knowing this will allow the appropriate treatment to be given. The system is complex and differs for the different types of cholangiocarcinoma. It does not need to be memorised but a broad understanding is important.
The stage of a
cancer
describes its size and whether it has spread beyond its original site-
T
Describes the size of the tumour
N
Describes if the cancer has spread to the lymph nodes
M
Describes if the cancer has metastasised
Improve
Management
Unfortunately most patients with cholangiocarcinoma present late and management options are limited.
The treatment depends on
The size and location of the
cancer
The stage of the cancer
The patients general health
Surgery offers patients the only chance of a cure. However, only around 33% of patients have resectable disease at diagnosis. Furthermore, even patients undergoing curative surgery will have recurrence and survival at 5 years is 10-45%.
The type of surgery depends on the location of the cancer.
Removal of the bile duct
Performed if the cancer is small and localised
Partial hepatectomy
If a whole lobe needs to be removed, this may extend to a lobectomy
Performed for intrahepatic bile duct cancers
Pancreaticoduodenectomy (Whipple's procedure)
Highly complex
Performed for distal bile duct cancers
If the tumour can be removed surgically, people may receive adjuvant chemotherapy or radiation therapy to reduce the chance of recurrence. It is important to note that bile duct cancers are
resistant
to many chemotherapy types and chemotherapy alone
cannot
cure the cancer.
Recently, there have been developments in the use of targeted therapy to treat cholangiocarcinomas. These therapies target the cancer's specific proteins that control its growth thereby blocking the cancer's ability to divide and spread.
The drug, Pemigatinib has now been licensed for use in patients with previously treated, unresectable locally advanced or metastatic cholangiocarcinoma with certain gene mutations.
Few patients will meet the criteria for surgery and therefore palliative measures are key. Measures can be put in place to reduce the symptoms caused by the disease. These include-
Stenting
ERCP can be used to stent the bile duct relieving obstructive symptoms.
If ERCP not possible, surgery can also be done for stent insertion
Chemo/radiotherapy
Reduce symptoms
Gemcitabine and Cisplatin are most commonly used
Improve
Complications
Complications can be related to the
cancer
itself
or
the treatment given:
Most of the complications related to the cancer are due to biliary obstruction. There are a few conditions to be particularly aware of including:
Biliary tract sepsis
Secondary biliary cirrhosis
Due to longstanding obstruction
Surgery for cholangiocarinomas is often highly complex. There are the general complications associated with all surgeries to consider including:
Anaesthetic risk
Haemorrhage
Injury to surrounding structures
Pain
Infection
Blood clots
More specific complications:
Anastomotic leaks
Pancreatic fistulas
Adhesions
Can lead to subsequent bowel obstruction
Diabetes
Delayed gastric emptying
Associated with nausea and vomiting
Nutritional problems
Patients often have to take supplemental enzymes
ERCP
Risk of pancreatitis
Improve
Prognosis
Prognosis is often very poor. As discussed previously, patients often present late where the chance of a cure has been missed.
Most patients are often only suitable for palliative management.
Prognosis tends to be better for those with extrahepatic tumours which are more likely suitable for surgical intervention.
30% of patients with localised disease will survive for 5 years or more after diagnosis. This falls to just 2% for those with metastatic disease.
By comparison, those with intrahepatic tumours:
Just 5% of patients with localised disease will survive for 5 years or more after diagnosis.
Improve
Cancer
Cholangiocarcinoma