Gallbladder cancer
Gallbladder cancer
Malignancy of the gallbladder is rare, with less than 1000 new diagnoses being made in the UK each year. Due to its mostly non-specific symptoms, it is commonly diagnosed incidentally and at a late stage, leaving patients with a generally poor prognosis.
The majority of gallbladder cancers (GBC) are adenocarcinomas (90% of cases).
Last updated: 10
th
October 2023
Aetiology
Risk Factors:
Risk factors for GBC can be separated into pathologies of the gallbladder and biliary tree, and environmental/lifestyle factors:
Gallbladder and biliary tree pathology
Environmental/lifestyle factors
Gallstones or a history of gallstone disease (75% of GBC cases)
Obesity: most likely as this is a risk factor for gallstone development
Porcelain gallbladder
: intramural gallbladder wall calcification which occurs as a result of chronic cholecystitis
Infection causing chronic cholangitis: most commonly
salmonella typhi
and
Helicobacter
infections
Gallbladder adenoma (polyps)
Carcinogen exposure: cigarette smoking and exposure to industrial chemicals
Abnormal bile duct anatomy: certain people have a congenital defect of the bile ducts which allows reflux of pancreatic secretions into the biliary tree, which can cause damage
Primary sclerosing cholangitis (PSC)
Improve
Clinical features
Early-stage GBC is often asymptomatic and is usually found incidentally during surgery (20% of GBC diagnoses). Of patients undergoing a routine cholecystectomy, around 1% will have GBC.
GBC becomes symptomatic as the tumour increases in size and/or invades other surrounding structures. Symptoms are typically non-specific and can mimic cholecystitis or cholelithiasis:
Right upper quadrant pain
Anorexia, nausea, and vomiting
Malaise and weight loss: usually in later stages of disease
Palpable right upper quadrant mass
Depending on the tumour location, patients may also present with obstructive jaundice:
Yellowing of the skin and sclera
Pale stools and dark urine
Pruritus
Jaundice can be the only sign of GBC if the tumour is small, but its location is obstructing bile drainage.
Improve
Staging
TNM staging
GBC is staged using the TNM staging system.
Tis
Carcinoma in situ
T1
Tumour invades the lamina propria and/or the muscular layer of the gallbladder
T2
Tumour invades the perimuscular connective tissue without involvement of the visceral peritoneum or liver
T3
Tumour invades the visceral peritoneum and/or the liver and/or one adjacent organ (e.g. the stomach, pancreas, bile ducts or intestines)
T4
Tumour invades the vascular structures (hepatic artery or portal vein) and/or invades two or more adjacent organs
Improve
Management
The only curative therapy for GBC is surgical resection. Resection is contraindicated if the patient also has:
Metastatic disease: the liver, peritoneum, and intestines are most commonly affected, but this includes distant metastasis.
Malignant ascites
Vascular invasion: superior mesenteric artery, celiac artery, hepatic artery, and portal vein are common sites
Patients who have surgically unresectable disease often receive chemoradiotherapy, but this has mixed success and is mainly useful for palliation. If patients develop obstructive jaundice, endoscopic common bile duct stents are useful for symptomatic relief.
If deemed resectable, the surgical method used varies depending upon the diseases T stage:
TNM stage
Method
explanation
Tis & T1
Simple cholecystectomy
Removal of the gallbladder
T2
Extended cholecystectomy
Resection of the gallbladder with a surrounding 2cm resection of adjacent tissue. This also includes the removal of surrounding lymph nodes.
T3
Extended cholecystectomy plus resection of affected adjacent organ
Resection of the gallbladder with a surrounding 2cm resection of adjacent tissue. This also includes the removal of surrounding lymph nodes. If the adjacent affected organ is resectable, this will also be removed either as a whole or in part (e.g. liver resection)
T4
Typically unresectable
Chemoradiotherapy
N1/2
Local lymph node resection
Removal of all surrounding lymph nodes (cystic duct, common bile duct, hepatic artery, portal vein, hepatoduodenal ligaments)
M1
Unresectable
Palliative therapy
Improve
Prognosis
Unfortunately, as most patients are diagnosed at a late stage of disease, the overall prognosis for GBC is poor.
T Stage
Survival at 3 years
T1
87%
T2
34%
T3
10%
T4
0%
Improve
Upper GI and hepatobiliary surgery
Gallbladder cancer