Achilles tendon disorders
Achilles tendon disorders
Achilles tendon disorders are the most common cause of posterior heel pain. Possible presentations include tendinopathy (tendinitis), partial tear and complete rupture of the Achilles tendon.
Last updated: 1
st
July 2024
Epidemiology
Incidence: 230.00 cases per 100,000 person-years
Peak incidence: 40-50 years
Sex ratio: 1:1
Condition
Relative
incidence
Achilles tendon disorders
1
Calcaneal apophysitis
0.22
<1
1-5
6+
16+
30+
40+
50+
60+
70+
80+
Aetiology
#
Intrinsic Risk Factors
Age
is a significant factor:
Tendinopathy is most common in middle-aged individuals (30-50 years)
Rupture typically occurs in the 30-40 age group, particularly in intermittently active individuals
Sex
:
Males are 2-12 times more likely to develop Achilles tendon disorders than females
Biomechanical abnormalities
:
Hyperpronation of the foot
Leg length discrepancy
Limited ankle dorsiflexion
Varus deformity of the forefoot
Systemic conditions
:
Inflammatory arthropathies (e.g. rheumatoid arthritis, psoriatic arthritis)
Diabetes mellitus
Obesity
Hypercholesterolaemia
Gout and other crystal arthropathies
Genetic factors
:
Blood group O (associated with increased risk of rupture)
Collagen disorders (e.g. Ehlers-Danlos syndrome)
Extrinsic Risk Factors
Physical activity patterns
:
Sudden increase in training intensity or duration
Change in training surface (particularly hard or slippery surfaces)
Inappropriate footwear with inadequate support
Sports involving explosive acceleration or jumping (e.g. tennis, badminton, football)
Medications
:
Fluoroquinolone antibiotics (e.g. ciprofloxacin, levofloxacin)
Corticosteroids (both systemic and local injection)
Environmental factors
:
Cold weather training
Training on uneven surfaces
Tendon Degeneration
Chronic tendinopathy typically involves a
degenerative process rather than inflammation
NICE Clinical Knowledge Summary
notes that the term "tendinitis" is increasingly replaced by "tendinopathy" as histological studies show degenerative changes rather than inflammatory cells
Repetitive microtrauma leads to:
Collagen fibre disorganisation
Increased ground substance
Neovascularisation
Areas of cellular hyperplasia and hypercellularity
Tendon rupture often occurs in tendons with pre-existing degenerative changes
Up to 97% of ruptured tendons show evidence of pre-existing degeneration
Improve
Clinical features
Achilles tendinopathy (tendinitis)
Features
gradual onset of posterior heel pain that is worse following activity
morning pain and stiffness are common
calf muscle eccentric exercises - this may be self-directed or under the guidance of physiotherapy
Achilles tendon rupture
Achilles tendon rupture should be suspected if the person describes the following whilst playing a sport or running; an audible 'pop' in the ankle, sudden onset significant pain in the calf or ankle or the inability to walk or continue the sport.
An examination should be conducted using Simmond's triad, to help exclude Achilles tendon rupture. This can be performed by asking the patient to lie prone with their feet over the edge of the bed. The examiner should look for an abnormal angle of declination; Achilles tendon rupture may lead to greater dorsiflexion of the injured foot compared to the uninjured limb. They should also feel for a gap in the tendon and gently squeeze the calf muscles  if there is an acute rupture of the Achilles tendon the injured foot will stay in the neutral position when the calf is squeezed.
Improve
Management
Achilles tendinopathy (tendinitis)
The management is typically supportive including simple analgesia and reduction in precipitating activities.
Achilles tendon rupture
An acute referral should be made to an orthopaedic specialist following a suspected rupture.
Improve
References
Clinical Knowledge Summaries - Achilles tendinopathy
Orthopaedic surgery
Achilles tendon disorders