Ankle sprain
Ankle sprain
A sprain is a stretching, partial or complete tear of a ligament. In the ankle, this can be divided into high ankle sprains involving the syndesmosis and low ankle sprains involving the lateral collateral ligaments.â
Last updated: 1
st
January 2025
Epidemiology
Incidence: 450.00 cases per 100,000 person-years
Peak incidence: 6-15 years
Sex ratio: more common in females 1:1
Condition
Relative
incidence
Ankle sprain
1
Ankle fracture
0.19
<1
1-5
6+
16+
30+
40+
50+
60+
70+
80+
Pathophysiology
The bony components of the ankle joint include the distal tibia and fibula and the superior aspect of the talus. Their configuration is such that they form a mortise, with the body of the talus acting as the tenon. This arrangement is secured by a number of ligamentous structures:
The syndesmosis binds the distal tibia and fibula together (another example of a syndesmosis is the distal radio-ulnar joint). It is composed of the anterior inferior tibiofibular ligament (AITFL), posterior inferior tibiofibular ligament (PITFL), interosseous ligament (IOL) and the interosseous membrane.
The distal fibular is secured to the to the talus by the anterior and posterior talofibular ligaments (ATFL and PTFL) and to the calcaneus by the calcaneofibular ligament. These ligaments are sometimes referred to collectively as the lateral collateral ligaments.
The distal tibia is secured to the talus by the deltoid ligament, in view of its triangular shape.
Improve
Classification
Low ankle sprains
Grade
Ligament disruption
Bruising and swelling
Pain on weight bearing
Grade I (mild)
Stretch or micro tear
minimal
normal
Grade II (moderate)
Partial tear
moderate
minimal
Grade III (severe)
Complete tear
Severe
Severe
Improve
Clinical features
A typical presentation of an ankle sprain usually follows a history of trauma, often involving an inversion injury to the foot. This results in damage to the lateral ligaments of the ankle, most commonly the anterior talofibular ligament. Patients typically present with acute onset pain localised to the lateral aspect of the ankle joint, swelling and difficulty in weight bearing.
Pain
is often immediate following injury and can be severe depending on the grade of sprain. It is generally localised to the area of ligamentous damage but can also radiate along the foot or up into the leg.
Swelling:
Rapid onset swelling is common, resulting from haemarthrosis or synovial fluid effusion due to capsular damage. The degree of swelling may correlate with severity of injury.
Tenderness:
Localised tenderness over affected ligaments on palpation is a cardinal sign. Tenderness over other areas should raise suspicion for concomitant injuries such as fractures or syndesmotic injuries.
Limited range of motion and functional impairment:
Patients may report difficulty in walking or inability to bear weight due to pain and instability. Active and passive range of motion may be restricted due to pain and swelling.
In addition to these classic signs, it's important not to overlook less common features that might suggest alternative or additional diagnoses. For example:
Bruising:
While bruising may occur in simple sprains, extensive bruising or ecchymosis could suggest a fracture or significant soft tissue injury.
Bony tenderness at specific locations:
Tenderness at the base of fifth metatarsal could indicate a Jones fracture while tenderness at the navicular bone could suggest a navicular fracture.
Instability:
Subjective instability or 'giving way' of the ankle, or objective instability on clinical examination may suggest a severe sprain or complete ligamentous rupture. Chronic instability might indicate previous similar injuries and inadequate rehabilitation.
Careful history taking is also paramount to identify any risk factors for poor healing such as smoking, diabetes, peripheral vascular disease and use of certain medications like corticosteroids.
A thorough neurological and vascular examination should always be performed to ensure no concomitant nerve or vascular injuries. Sensation, motor function and peripheral pulses should be assessed in the affected limb.
Improve
Investigations
Low ankle sprains
Investigation:
Radiographs should be done according to the Ottawa ankle rules as 15% of sprains are associated with a fracture.
MRI if persistent pain and useful for evaluating perineal tendons.â
High ankle sprains
â Investigations:
Radiographs may show widening of the tibiofibular joint (diastasis) or ankle mortise.
MRI if high suspicion of syndesmotic injury, but normal plain films.
Improve
Management
Low ankle sprains
Treatment:
Non-operative with rest, ice, compression and elevation (the so-called RICE protocol).
Occasionally a removable orthosis, cast and/or crutches may be required for short-term symptom relief.
If symptoms fail to settle or there is significant joint instability then an MRI and surgical intervention may be contemplated, but this is rare.
High ankle sprains
â Treatment:
If no diastasis then non-weight-bearing orthosis or cast until pain subsides.
If diastasis or failed non-operative management then operative fixation is usually warranted.
Isolated injuries to the deltoid ligament are rare as they are frequently associated with a fracture and one should always be on the lookout for Maisonneuve fracture of the proximal fibula. Provided the ankle mortise is anatomically reduced then treatment can be as per a low ankle sprain, if not then reduction and fixation may be warranted.â
Improve
Orthopaedic surgery
Ankle sprain