Colles' fracture
Colles' fracture
A Colles' fracture is an extra-articular fracture of the distal radius with dorsal angulation of the distal radius fragment.
It is a common fracture, affecting 15% of people during their lifetime. Colles' fractures typically occur due to a fall on an outstretched hand (FOOSH) and most commonly affect people with osteoporosis. Complications of Colles' fractures include median nerve palsy and malunion.
Last updated: 1
st
January 2025
Epidemiology
Incidence: 180.00 cases per 100,000 person-years
Peak incidence: 70+ years
Sex ratio: more common in females 2:1
<1
1-5
6+
16+
30+
40+
50+
60+
70+
80+
Aetiology
Colles' fractures most commonly affect
older females with osteoporosis
. In this age group, they are associated with low-energy trauma such as a
FOOSH
. Due to their strong association with osteoporosis, they are commonly known as a
'fragility fracture'.
As such, the main risk factors for sustaining a Colles' fracture are related to osteoporosis and include:
Female gender
Being post-menopausal confers a higher risk of osteoporosis
Increasing age
Prolonged steroid use
Smoking
Low BMI
In younger people, Colles' fractures tend to occur due to
high-energy
trauma.
Improve
Clinical features
Colles' fracture typically occur in older people after a
fall on an outstretched hand (FOOSH)
with the forearm pronated in dorsiflexion. They can also occur in younger people, typically after
high-energy trauma
such as road traffic accidents.
Typical presenting symptoms of a Colles' fracture are:
Wrist pain
and swelling
Pain and swelling usually occur immediately after the fracture is sustained
Movement at the wrist is painful
Wrist deformity
Colles' fractures typically cause a
'dinner-fork' deformity
of the wrist, caused by dorsal displacement of the distal fragment of the radius.
Paresthesia and weakness
If the fracture causes neurological damage this may result in paraesthesia and weakness of the wrist and/or fingers
The
median nerve
is the most common nerve to be damaged by a Colles' fracture, affecting up to 12% of cases caused by low-energy trauma and up to 30% of cases caused by high-energy trauma
Improve
Investigations
If a Colles' fracture is suspected, the gold standard investigation for diagnosis is a
plain radiograph
using 2 views. Typically, an
AP (anteroposterior) and lateral view
are sufficient for diagnosis although oblique views are sometimes included.
Features of a Colles' fracture on a plain radiograph are:
Transverse fracture
of the distal radius.
The fracture is typically
2.5cm proximal to the radio-carpal (wrist) joint.
Dorsal displacement and angulation of the distal fragment of the radius.
In some cases the distal fragment of the radius is comminuted.
There may be an associated ulnar styloid fracture.
CT/MRI
scans may be performed for complex fractures or if a more detailed image is required for preoperative planning.
Improve
Differential diagnosis
Colles' fractures account for
90% of all distal radius fractures
, however, other distal radius fracture types may share similar clinical features therefore imaging is important to differentiate them. Other types of distal radius fracture include:
Smith's fracture
In this type of distal radius fracture, there is
volar angulation
of the distal radius fragment as opposed to dorsal angulation as seen in Colles' fractures
There may or may not be concomitant
volar displacement
Smith's fractures are typically sustained after a fall onto a
flexed wrist
, rather than an extended wrist as seen in Colles' fractures
There may be a
'garden-spade deformity'
on clinical examination
Barton's fracture
This is similar to a Colles' fracture, however, a Barton's fracture is
intra-articular with dislocation of the radio-carpal joint
Barton's fractures can be
volar or, less commonly, dorsal,
depending on which margin of the radius is affected
In addition, other types of injury to the forearm or wrist may share symptoms and clinical features with a Colles' fracture:
Galeazzi fracture
This is a fracture of the radius which usually occurs at the junction of the middle and distal third of the radial shaft
This injury is typically caused by a
FOOSH with the elbow in flexion
Typically affects children rather than adults, with a
peak incidence of age 9-12 years
Wrist dislocation
The most common carpal bone dislocation is
perilunate dislocation
This injury is typically sustained by a
FOOSH
Carpal dislocations are commonly missed on imaging
Carpal bone fracture
The most common carpal bone fracture is a fracture of the
scaphoid bone
This type of fracture is caused by a
FOOSH
Although this can affect any age,
young adults
are most commonly affected
There is typically pain in the
anatomical snuffbox
Improve
Management
Choice of management of a Colles' fracture depends on the severity of the fracture. The most common treatment method is
closed reduction with immobilisation with a plaster cast.
If certain circumstances,
open reduction and internal fixation (ORIF)
or external fixation may be required, such as:
Unstable fracture
Significant angulation of the distal fragment of the radius
Usually defined as >10 degrees dorsal angulation
Closed reduction is unsuccessful
Comminuted fracture
Colles' fractures typically unite by
6 weeks
and
repeat X-rays
should be performed to ensure adequate union.
Improve
Complications
Complications of a Colles' fracture include:
Malunion
If a fracture heals in a non-anatomical position, this is known as
malunion
Malunion is a relatively common complication of a Colles' fracture and is estimated to affect up to
33% of cases
Malunion of a Colles' fracture can lead to a 'dinner-fork' deformity, pain, loss of strength and a limited range of movement
Revision surgery
may be required
Median nerve damage
It is important to
assess for neurovascular damage
in a patient who has a suspected or confirmed Colles' fracture
The
median nerve
is the most common nerve to be damaged in a Colles' fracture
Median nerve neuropathy occurs in approximately
1-12%
of low energy fractures and
30%
of high energy fractures
Damage to the median nerve may cause
median nerve palsy
and
post-traumatic carpal tunnel syndrome
Symptoms of median nerve damage include paresthesia, weakness and pain in the wrist and/or fingers
Decompression surgery
may be required
Rupture of the extensor pollicis longus (EPL) tendon
This is an uncommon but important complication of a Colles' fracture
An
EPL tendon rupture
is more likely to occur if the Colles' fracture is non-displaced and is due to mechanical attrition or tendon ischaemia
Clinical features of an EPL tendon rupture include the inability to extend the interphalangeal joint of the thumb
Surgical treatment is required
Secondary osteoarthritis of the radio-carpal joint
Although
secondary osteoarthritis
is more common in
intra-articular
fractures of the distal radius, it can sometimes occur due to Colles' fractures
Post-traumatic osteoarthritis can lead to pain and reduced range of movement at the wrist joint
Improve
Orthopaedic surgery
Colles' fracture