Greater trochanteric pain syndrome
Greater trochanteric pain syndrome
Greater trochanteric pain syndrome (GTPS) is a common condition which causes lateral hip and buttock pain. The condition affects approximately 1 in 300 people per year. It most commonly affects women aged 40-60 years and is estimated to be the cause of
hip pain
in 10-20% of patients presenting to primary care with hip pain.
GTPS used to be referred to as trochanteric bursitis- however current research suggests that pain is more commonly caused by injury to the soft tissues (muscles and tendons) in these regions, rather than by inflammation of the trochanteric bursa.
Last updated: 3
rd
July 2023
Epidemiology
Incidence: 300.00 cases per 100,000 person-years
Peak incidence: 50-60 years
Sex ratio: more common in females 4:1
Condition
Relative
incidence
Osteoarthritis of the hip
1.67
Greater trochanteric pain syndrome
1
Hip fracture
0.42
Acetabular labral tear
0.17
Avascular necrosis of the hip
0.01
<1
1-5
6+
16+
30+
40+
50+
60+
70+
80+
Aetiology
GTPS is most commonly cause by minor injury or inflammation to the soft tissue in the region of the lateral hip and buttock.
Causes of this include:
Trauma
A fall on to the lateral aspect of the hip.
Postural habit and/or over-use injury
Excessive weight-bearing exercise- e.g. walking or running.
Prolonged standing on one leg, and/or sitting with crossed legs.
Co-morbidity
Osteoarthritis of the hip
/s or knee/s
Lower back pain
Previous hip surgery- with an implant, and/or associated scar tissue
Leg length discrepancies
Lifestyle
Inactivity- leading to weakness and reduced flexibility of the gluteal muscles.
Obesity
Commonly, a number of these causes contribute to a patient developing the syndrome.
Improve
Pathophysiology
The greater trochanter is a bony protrusion located at the lateral aspect of the proximal femur. It serves as an attachment for the two major abductor tendons of the hip: gluteus minimus and medius. The primary function of these muscles is to stabilise the head of the femur in the acetabulum during movement of the hip. The other major abductor of the hip is the tensor fascia lata. The fascia lata is a sheet of fibrous tissue which surrounds the muscles of the thigh. At the outer aspect of the thigh there is a thickening of this referred to as the ilio-tibial tract. The other large gluteal muscle- the gluteus maximus attaches to the ilio-tibial tract.
There are a variable number of bursae in trochanteric region. The largest- which is most often referred to as 'trochanteric bursa' (also known as the subgluteus maximus bursa)- is located lateral to the greater trochanter between the gluteus medius and maximus.
GTPS is associated with damage to the tendons of the gluteus medius and/or minimus muscles +/- inflammation of the trochanteric bursa.
This damage is thought to be caused by:
Compression by the iliotibial band on the gluteal muscle tendons and trochanteric bursa as the hip is adducted.
This compression is contributed to by:
Weakness of the abductor muscles of the hip
Causing lateral pelvic tilt.
Improve
Clinical features
At present there are no specific diagnostic criteria for GTPS.
Symptoms include:
Chronic, intermittent, lateral hip/thigh/buttock pain exacerbated by:
Weight bearing activity
Lying on affected side
Some patients report radiation of pain to the knee.
Signs include:
Pain on palpation of the greater trochanter
Associated positive predictive value (PPV) of 83% (for positive MRI features)
Pain within 30 seconds of standing of one leg
Associated PPV of 100% (for positive MRI features)
Positive Trendelenburg gait
Pain on movement of hip in directions that cause increased tension of the gluteus medius and minimus tendons- i.e. FABER test (flexion, abduction, and external rotation), FADER test (flexion, adduction, and external rotation), and ADD test (passive hip adduction)
Improve
Investigations
GTPS is generally a clinical diagnosis; made on the basis of history, and examination findings.
Ultrasound and MRI can be used to confirm the diagnosis.
Positive findings on ultrasound/MRI imaging include:
Inflammation of the trochanteric bursa
Tendinopathic echogenic findings
Tears of the gluteus medius or minimus muscles and/or tendons.
Abnormalities detected on imaging have to be correlated with clinical examination as they can be present in patients who are asymptomatic.
Patients in whom the diagnosis is unclear will often undergo a hip X-ray. This is to exclude the common differentials of GTPS e.g.
hip osteoarthritis
.
Improve
Differential diagnosis
The three most likely conditions to consider are
hip osteoarthritis
, lumbar radiculopathy, and iliotibial band syndrome.
Hip Osteoarthritis (OA):
This degenerative joint disease frequently manifests as pain in the hip region. Unlike GTPS, where the discomfort is localised laterally, hip OA often presents with groin pain or deep gluteal discomfort. The pain may be accompanied by stiffness, especially in the mornings or after periods of prolonged inactivity. The range of motion in the hip may also be reduced in OA, which isn't a typical feature of GTPS. Furthermore, radiographic imaging in hip OA may reveal joint space narrowing, subchondral sclerosis, or osteophyte formation, while these are absent in GTPS.
Lumbar Radiculopathy:
Lumbar radiculopathy, also known as sciatica, is another condition that can mimic GTPS. Characterised by nerve root impingement in the lower back, this condition typically presents with pain radiating from the lower back down to the buttock, thigh, or lower leg along the affected nerve distribution. The pain, often described as sharp, shooting, or electric, can be associated with numbness, tingling, or muscle weakness, unlike GTPS. Moreover, the pain in lumbar radiculopathy is often exacerbated by spinal movements and isn't usually localised to the greater trochanter. Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI) can confirm nerve root compression or other spine pathology, aiding in distinguishing it from GTPS.
Iliotibial Band Syndrome (ITBS):
ITBS is a common cause of lateral
hip pain
, especially in active individuals and runners. Pain with ITBS is usually more distally located, over the lateral knee, but can also be experienced around the hip. Patients with ITBS often describe a sharp or burning pain that worsens with activity, particularly with running or cycling. On physical examination, palpation of the lateral knee or hip may elicit pain, and certain movements like the Ober's test (used to assess ITB tightness) may reproduce symptoms. Unlike GTPS, ITBS pain is often linked with specific physical activities and may not be provoked by direct palpation of the greater trochanter.
Improve
Management
Management as recommended by the latest NICE guidance is as follows:
GTPS is usually a self-limiting condition. Current research suggests that 6 out of 10 people will get better within a year. It will resolve in over 90% of people with conservative treatment.
Main management goals are to:
Reduce compressive forces across greater trochanter and gluteal tendons
Weight loss
Avoidance of positions of excessive hip adduction (i.e. Crossing legs, ITB stretching exercises).
Strengthen gluteal muscles (i.e. The hip abductors)
Physiotherapy
Conservative treatment
Rest
Short-term reduction/avoidance of weight-bearing exercises such as running
Analgesia
Paracetamol or a non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drug (NSAIDs)
(In early stages) use of ice pack wrapped in towel for 10-20 minutes several times per day.
Physiotherapy
Peri-trochanteric corticosteroid injection
Generally reserved for cases where other conservative treatment modalities have failed, or in the short-term to enable physiotherapy (which has been shown to improve the long-term outlook).
Evidence of short-term benefit - up to three months, with the most significant effect seen at six weeks.
At twelve months- existing studies show no different in outcome to a watch and wait approach.
Surgical intervention is reserved for the small portion of cases in which conservative management is unsuccessful. Procedures performed are dependent on the conditions underlying pathology but can include lengthening/release of the ITB and fascia lata; gluteal tendon tear repair; minimally invasive endoscopic bursectomy; or open reduction trochanteric osteotomy.
Shock wave therapy (i.e. Therapeutic ultrasound) has been used as a treatment modality for GTPS- however it is not readily available in NHS clinics, and there is currently no specific protocol for its use for GTPS. NICE has previously stated (2011) that: it should only be done by clinicians with specific training in its use, and as a treatment option for refractory GTPS. Further research is needed into its use.
Improve
Orthopaedic surgery
Greater trochanteric pain syndrome