Age related macular degeneration
Age related macular degeneration
Age-related macular degeneration is the most common cause of blindness in the UK. Degeneration of the central retina (macula) is the key feature with changes usually bilateral. ARMD is characterised by degeneration of retinal photoreceptors that results in the formation of drusen which can be seen on fundoscopy and retinal photography. It is more common with advancing age and is more common in females.
Last updated: 17
th
January 2022
Epidemiology
Incidence: 110.00 cases per 100,000 person-years
Peak incidence: 70+ years
Sex ratio: 1:1
<1
1-5
6+
16+
30+
40+
50+
60+
70+
80+
Aetiology
Risk factors
advancing age itself is the greatest risk factor for ARMD
the risk of ARMD increases 3 fold for patients aged older than 75 years, versus those aged 65-74.
smoking
current smokers are twice as likely as non-smokers to have ARMD related
visual loss
, and ex-smokers have a slightly increased risk of developing the condition, (OR 1.13).
family history is also a strong risk factor for developing ARMD
first degree relatives of a sufferer of ARMD are thought to be four times more likely to inherit the condition.
other risk factors for developing the condition include those associated with an increased risk of ischaemic cardiovascular disease, such as hypertension, dyslipidaemia and diabetes mellitus.
Improve
Classification
Traditionally two forms of macular degeneration are seen:
dry macular degeneration
90% of cases
also known as atrophic
characterised by
drusen
- yellow round spots in Bruch's membrane
wet macular degeneration
10% of cases
also known as exudative or neovascular macular degeneration
characterised by
choroidal neovascularisation
leakage of serous fluid and blood can subsequently result in a rapid loss of vision
carries the worst prognosis
Improve
Clinical features
Patients typically present with a subacute onset of
visual loss
with:
a reduction in visual acuity, particularly for near field objects
gradual in dry ARMD
subacute in wet ARMD
difficulties in dark adaptation with an overall deterioration in vision at night
fluctuations in visual disturbance which may vary significantly from day to day
they may also suffer from photopsia, (a perception of flickering or flashing lights), and glare around objects
visual hallucinations may also occur resulting in Charles-Bonnet syndrome
Signs:
distortion of line perception may be noted on
Amsler grid testing
fundoscopy reveals the presence of drusen, yellow areas of pigment deposition in the macular area, which may become confluent in late disease to form a macular scar.
in wet ARMD well demarcated red patches may be seen which represent intra-retinal or sub-retinal fluid leakage or haemorrhage.
Improve
Investigations
- slit-lamp microscopy is the initial investigation of choice, to identify any pigmentary, exudative or haemorrhagic changes affecting the retina which may identify the presence of ARMD. This is usually accompanied by colour fundus photography to provide a baseline against which changes can be identified over time.
fluorescein angiography is utilised if neovascular ARMD is suspected, as this can guide intervention with anti-VEGF therapy. This may be complemented with indocyanine green angiography to visualise any changes in the choroidal circulation.
ocular coherence tomography is used to visualise the retina in three dimensions because it can reveal areas of disease which aren't visible using microscopy alone.
Improve
Management
- the AREDS trial examined the treatment of dry ARMD in 3640 subjects. It showed that a combination of zinc with anti-oxidant vitamins A,C and E reduced progression of the disease by around one third. Patients with more extensive drusen seemed to benefit most from the intervention. Treatment is therefore recommended in patients with at least moderate category dry ARMD.
vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF)
VEGR is a potent mitogen and drives increased vascular permeability in patients with wet ARMD
a number of trials have shown that use of anti-VEGF agents can limit progression of wet ARMD and stabilise or reverse
visual loss
evidence suggests that they should be instituted within the first two months of diagnosis of wet ARMD if possible
examples of anti-VEGF agents include ranibizumab,
bevacizumab
and pegaptanib,. The agents are usually administered by 4 weekly injection.
laser photocoagulation does slow progression of ARMD where there is new vessel formation, although there is a risk of acute visual loss after treatment, which may be increased in patients with sub-foveal ARMD. For this reason anti-VEGF therapies are usually preferred.
Improve
References
Webvision - Age related macular degeneration fundoscopy findings
Ophthalmology
Age related macular degeneration