Psoriatic arthropathy
Psoriatic arthropathy
Psoriatic arthritis is a
chronic inflammatory arthritis
which is associated with
psoriasis
. It may be develop alongside the rash seen in psoriasis, or years later. In rare cases it can be seen without a psoriatic rash.
It is a type of
seronegative
arthritis, with characteristic features which may differentiate it from
rheumatoid arthritis
(RA) and other inflammatory arthritides.
Presentation can be varied and as such it can be easily overlooked.
However, as it is potentially progressive, causing joint destruction and worsening disability over time, it is an important diagnosis.
Management of the condition is focussed on preventing joint destruction, and features the use of
disease modifying anti-rheumatic drugs
(DMARDs) in a similar way to that of RA.
Last updated: 21
st
May 2025
Epidemiology
Incidence: 8.00 cases per 100,000 person-years
Peak incidence: 50-60 years
Sex ratio: 1:1
Condition
Relative
incidence
Rheumatoid arthritis
5.00
Psoriatic arthropathy
1
Reactive arthritis
0.63
<1
1-5
6+
16+
30+
40+
50+
60+
70+
80+
Aetiology
The aetiology of psoriatic arthritis is not fully understood. Nevertheless, both
genetic
and
environmental
factors have been implicated in the disease.
Genetic factors:
First degree relatives of patients with psoriatic arthritis have an increased risk of psoriasis (30-50%) and of psoriatic arthritis (15%)
Specific HLA B and HLA C alleles have been implicated in the development of psoriatic arthritis.
HLA B27 and HLA B39
are associated with development of joint and skin disease
HLA Cw0606 is associated most strongly with early onset, severe psoriasis and late onset arthritis
Trauma and infection:
Trauma to joints or tendons has been linked with the development of psoriatic arthritis
Infections such as HIV have been implicated in the development of the disease
Improve
Pathophysiology
Various
cellular mechanisms
have been implicated in the disease process in psoriatic arthritis.
The synovium in psoriatic arthritis has been found to be
more vascular
than in
rheumatoid arthritis
, with vessels being more tortuous.
This has been linked with the
overexpression of vascular growth factors
(eg vascular endothelial growth factor)
Vascular growth factors work with
tumour necrosis factor
to cause bony destruction.
Cytokines lead to
osteoclast activation
, causing joint erosions and osteolysis
Cytokines have been found to have a role in synovitis in psoriatic arthritis.
Improve
Classification
Psoriatic arthritis can be classified according to the pattern of joints which are affected:
Oligoarthritis
Less than five joints affected
Tends to be asymmetrical
Thought to be the most common presentation
Symmetrical polyarthritis
Also known as 'rheumatoid pattern'
Distal interphalangeal joints (DIPs) tend to be affected rather than metacarpophalangeal joints (MCPs), as seen in
rheumatoid arthritis
A common presenting pattern in psoriatic arthritis
DIP predominant
Seen more often in men
Less common, affecting <20% patients
Spondyloarthritis
Spondylitis (inflammation of the vertebrae) +/- sacroiliitis (inflammation at the sacroiliac joint)
Presents with inflammatory back pain
Arthritis mutilans
Rarest form of psoriatic arthritis causing severe deformity of the hands
Destruction of the terminal phalanx causes a 'telescopic' appearance of the fingers
There may be some crossover between types, and patterns of affected joints can vary over time. Estimating prevalence of each type is therefore difficult, but it is agreed that
oligoarthritis and symmetrical polyarthritis
are more common, and
arthritis mutilans
is least common.
Improve
Clinical features
Psoriasis:
current or past psoriatic rash or
nail changes
is seen in the majority of patients with psoriatic arthritis. Rash/nail changes usually precede joint involvement.
Wilson et al. (2009) found that 41% of patients with psoriatic arthritis had arthritis at the time of first presentation with rash. The remainder developed arthritis after the rash, with a mean onset time of 7 years.
Skin/nail changes are sometimes absent or unreported and
psoriatic rash or nail changes are not essential to diagnosis
.
Nail changes may be subtle, and can include pitting, ridges or onycholysis.
Inflammatory arthritis:
joint pain which is worse after long periods of rest, features prolonged morning stiffness of >30 minutes, and improves with activity.
On examination, there are often signs of synovitis (tenderness and swelling of joints).
The pattern of joint involvement may mimic
rheumatoid arthritis
, or ankylosing spondylitis, or may form distinct patterns as discussed above.
Features specific to psoriatic arthritis:
Dactylitis
Swelling of a whole digit
NICE guidelines (2017) advise referral of anyone with dactylitis to a rheumatologist for assessment
Enthesitis
Inflammation at the site of tendon attachment
Commonly presents as elbow, heel or lateral hip pain
Patients may report history of achilles tendonitis, plantar fasciitis or epicondylitis
Improve
Investigations
Diagnosis can often be made from history and examination, and there is no single diagnostic investigation.
Diagnosis and management of psoriatic arthritis should be coordinated by secondary care, and so
referral
to a rheumatologist should be made if psoriatic arthritis is suspected. Specialists may employ validated diagnostic criteria (such as the Classification of Psoriatic Arthritis [CASPAR] criteria) to aid diagnosis.
Investigations can be used to support diagnosis, or to help in differentiating between different forms of arthritis.
Blood tests
Inflammatory markers (ESR/CRP)
Often raised, especially in active disease
Normal inflammatory markers do not exclude psoriatic arthritis
Rheumatoid Factor (RF)
Non-specific, so may be positive in up to 10% patients with psoriatic arthritis
A negative RF may help to differentiate between psoriatic and
rheumatoid arthritis
Anti-cyclic citrullinated peptides (anti-CCP)
More specific for RA than RF, but may still be positive in 8-16% of patients with psoriatic arthritis, more likely in severe disease
A negative anti-CCP may help to differentiate between RA and psoriatic arthritis
HLA-B27
A positive result increases the probability of spondyloarthritis
A negative HLA-B27 test does not exclude spondyloarthritis
Imaging
Plain film x-rays
Hands and feet if symptomatic; x-rays of other symptomatic joints should be considered
X-ray changes may be
absent in early disease
DIP joint erosion and periarticular new-bone formation
Osteolysis and pencil-in-cup deformity in advanced disease/arthritis mutilans
Ultrasound
Helpful for diagnosis in absence of x-ray changes
Tendon swelling, increased blood flow and erosions
suggest inflammation
MRI of affected joints may be considered
If psoriatic arthritis is confirmed,
sacroiliac x-rays should be offered
to look for evidence of asymptomatic involvement.
Improve
Diagnosis
CASPAR Criteria for Psoriatic Arthritis
The CASPAR (Classification Criteria for Psoriatic Arthritis) criteria are used to classify psoriatic arthritis (PsA) in patients with inflammatory joint disease. They are highly specific and sensitive, especially in differentiating PsA from
rheumatoid arthritis
and other spondyloarthropathies.
To meet the criteria, the patient must have evidence of
inflammatory articular disease
(joint, spinal, or entheseal) and score
≥3 points
from the following features:
Scoring Criteria
Evidence of psoriasis
current psoriasis: 2 points
personal history of psoriasis (if not currently active): 1 point
family history of psoriasis (if no personal history): 1 point
Note:
only one of the above may be counted; use the highest scoring item
Nail changes
typical of psoriasis (1 point)
includes onycholysis, nail pitting, and hyperkeratosis
Negative rheumatoid factor (RF)
by standard testing (1 point)
Dactylitis
(1 point)
current or previously recorded by a clinician
Radiographic evidence of juxta-articular new bone formation
(1 point)
must be seen on plain radiographs of hands or feet
excludes osteophytes (degenerative bone changes)
Interpretation
Total score must be
≥3 points
to classify the patient as having psoriatic arthritis
Criteria have a
sensitivity of ~91%
and
specificity of ~98%
in specialist settings
Use in Practice
While originally developed for classification in clinical trials, the CASPAR criteria are also used in clinical practice to support diagnosis, particularly when features overlap with rheumatoid arthritis or other spondyloarthropathies
Improve
Differential diagnosis
Psoriatic arthritis may be mistaken for
other causes of arthritis
and key differential diagnoses include:
Rheumatoid arthritis
SImilarities: inflammatory arthritis of multiple joints including the hands and feet, RF may be positive in both
Differences:
dactylitis
is not a feature of RA, lumbar and sacroiliac involvement is not typical of RA, rheumatoid nodules not seen in psoriatic arthritis
Reactive arthritis
Similarities: can present with oligoarthritis, enthesitis and dactylitis
Differences: strong history of past gastrointestinal/genitourinary infection not seen in psoriatic arthritis, rash absent in reactive arthritis
Gout
Similarities: can present with oligoarthritis affecting the feet
Differences: absence of rash in gout, presence of crystals in synovial fluid in gout
Improve
Management
Management of psoriatic arthritis should be
holistic
, addressing symptoms, disease progression and potential complications and disability. A
multidisciplinary approach
is essential. Management of joint disease in psoriatic arthritis is
similar to in RA
, with early use of DMARDs to induce remission and prevent joint destruction.
Given the varied nature of presentation and progression, no single approach can be used for all patients.
Concomitant management of skin disease may require dermatology input
The
NICE guidelines (2017) and European League Against Rheumatism guidelines (2016)
discuss the facets of management, which can be broken down into conservative and medical (both symptomatic and disease-modifying).
Conservative:
For patients with difficulties with activities of daily living, referral should be considered to:
Physiotherapy
Hand therapy
Podiatry
Occupational therapy
Aim to assess their needs, provide advice/equipment, and regular follow-up
Medical:
Symptomatic
NSAIDs - offer symptomatic relief for joint pain. EULAR guidelines recommend they may be used alone in initial management for limited disease. There is some disagreement, however, as NICE guidelines recommend using NSAIDs as an adjunct to DMARDs (this is the same as the approach seen in RA)
Intra-articular corticosteroid injections - may be used alone or in combination with oral medication
DMARDs
DMARDs may be considered if there is a
failure of response
to initial medical treatment or if there is
severe disease at diagnosis
1st line:
standard DMARDs
(methotrexate, leflunomide or sulfasalazine). EULAR guidelines recommend methotrexate first (as also recommended in RA) given its concomitant effect on skin as well as joints
2nd line:
biological agents
(etanercept, infliximab, apremilast)
DMARDs can be
combined
if necessary
Short courses of
oral corticosteroids
may be needed while initiating DMARD therapy
Improve
Complications
Complications of psoriatic arthritis may be related to disease activity or treatment.
Joint deformity
Progressive disease is associated with
joint destruction
and resultant deformity
Shortening of digits due to
bone lysis
The proportion of patients affected by joint deformity is unclear due to a paucity of epidemiological data showing the long term impact of the now widely-used DMARDs
Functional limitation
Pain and joint deformities
can cause difficulties with work and activities of daily living
EULAR guidelines point out that absence of active disease does not preclude functional limitations
Cardiovascular risk
Patients with psoriatic arthritis have been shown to have higher rates of
hypertension and ischaemic heart disease
Risk is higher for patients with
diabetes and obesity
as comorbidities
An association between psoriatic arthritis and
metabolic syndrome
has been demonstrated, which is thought to play a role in this
Malignancy
Treatment with DMARDs has been associated with an increased risk of malignancy
NICE guidelines recommend advising patients on a
TNF-α inhibitor
(infliximab, etanercept, gomilimumab) that they are at an increased risk of
skin cancer
Improve
References
Annals of the Rheumatic Diseases - Relative incidence of polyarthritis vs. oligoarthritis
Patient.info - Psoriatic arthropathy review
Rheumatology
Psoriatic arthropathy