Acute exacerbation of COPD
Acute exacerbation of COPD
An acute exacerbation of
chronic obstructive pulmonary disease
(COPD) is an event of acute deterioration in a patient's baseline clinical status that often necessitates a change in medication. Patients typically present with a worsening of their day-to-day
respiratory
symptoms, most commonly increasing
dyspnoea
,
sputum
volume and sputum purulence.
Exacerbations accelerate the physiological and functional decline of patients with COPD and constitute a large proportion of emergency hospital admissions in the UK.
Last updated: 1
st
February 2024
Epidemiology
Incidence: 1500.00 cases per 100,000 person-years
Peak incidence: 60-70 years
Sex ratio: more common in males 1.1:1
Condition
Relative
incidence
Acute exacerbation of
COPD
1
Acute exacerbation of asthma
0.67
Pneumonia
0.33
Acute heart failure
0.13
Pulmonary embolism
0.05
<1
1-5
6+
16+
30+
40+
50+
60+
70+
80+
Aetiology
Acute exacerbations of
chronic obstructive pulmonary disease
(AECOPD) are typically precipitated by a number of identifiable risk factors and underlying causes. These can be broadly categorised into infectious and non-infectious aetiologies.
Infectious Aetiologies
Bacterial infections:
A significant proportion of AECOPD cases are attributable to bacterial pathogens. Key organisms include
Streptococcus pneumoniae, Haemophilus influenzae, Moraxella catarrhalis,
and atypical bacteria such as
Mycoplasma pneumoniae
and
Chlamydophila pneumoniae
.
Viral infections:
Respiratory
viruses also play a substantial role in the aetiology of AECOPD. Common viral pathogens include rhinovirus, influenza virus, parainfluenza virus, coronavirus, respiratory syncytial virus (RSV), and human metapneumovirus.
Non-Infectious Aetiologies
Air pollution:
Exposure to indoor and outdoor air pollutants has been associated with an increased risk of AECOPD. These pollutants include tobacco smoke, biomass fuel combustion products, industrial emissions, vehicle exhaust fumes, and dust particles.
Allergens:
Sensitisation to common allergens such as pollen or pet dander can trigger an exacerbation in susceptible individuals.
Pulmonary embolism
:
Although less common than the other causes listed, pulmonary embolism can present as an acute exacerbation of COPD in some instances.
Medication non-compliance:
Failure to adhere to prescribed COPD management regimens can precipitate an acute exacerbation. This includes both pharmacological treatments such as bronchodilators and corticosteroids, as well as non-pharmacological interventions like pulmonary rehabilitation and smoking cessation.
In addition to these risk factors, several host factors have been identified that may increase the susceptibility of individuals with COPD to acute exacerbations. These include severe underlying disease, frequent prior exacerbations, comorbid conditions (e.g., heart failure or diabetes), and poor nutritional status.
Improve
Pathophysiology
In
COPD
, the airways are obstructed due to inflammation and have high compliance due to emphysematous destruction. These pathophysiological mechanisms limit airflow during expiration, leading to gas trapping and lung hyperinflation. Pulmonary vasculature can also be subjected to emphysematous changes, causing pulmonary hypertension and right ventricular dysfunction.
During an exacerbation, the following processes happen:
Increased inflammation, mucosal oedema and bronchospasm further limit expiratory flow
Gas trapping worsens, increasing ventilation-perfusion mismatch
The resulting hypoxia and hypercapnia trigger the neural drive to increase ventilation
Respiratory
muscles
fatigue
, leading to a 'neuromechanical decoupling' that reduces the ventilatory drive
Existing cardiac dysfunction worsens due to increasing pulmonary vascular resistance
Improve
Clinical features
The clinical presentation of exacerbations of
COPD
range in severity from mild exacerbations that can be successfully managed in the community with increased short-acting bronchodilators to severe exacerbations that present with
respiratory
failure requiring ventilatory support. Thus, the key aim of the clinical assessment is to identify the patients who are at risk of deterioration and need to be managed in hospital.
All patients present with some form of deterioration in their respiratory status, however this needs to be characterised in terms of its variation from the patient's baseline symptoms and the time course of its development. The modified Anthonisen criteria suggest that a diagnosis of an exacerbation of COPD can be made if there are at least 2 of the major symptoms or at least one major and one minor symptom:
Major symptoms -
dyspnoea
, increased
sputum
volume, increased sputum purulence
Minor symptoms -
cough
,
wheeze
, nasal discharge, sore throat, pyrexia
Signs of an acute exacerbation of COPD on physical examination include:
Increased respiratory effort -
tachypnoea
, nasal flaring, use of accessory muscles, paradoxical chest wall movement
Tachycardia
- this could be due to anxiety, hypoxia and/or increased respiratory effort
Worsening airway obstruction heard on auscultation:
Reduced breath sounds
Prolongation of the expiratory phase with wheezing
Crackles which could indicate an infective component
In addition, the following signs are good indicators of the patient's respiratory status:
Indicators of hypoxia and/or hypercapnia:
New or worsening central cyanosis
Asterixis
Altered mentation e.g. confusion, drowsiness
Reduced respiratory effort such as shallow breaths indicate that the patient is tiring and is at risk of progression to respiratory failure
Hypotension could be an early of sign of haemodynamic instability indicating impending respiratory arrest
The measurement of airflow obstruction using Peak Expiratory Flow (PEF) or Forced Expiratory Volume in 1 second (FEV1) is not useful during the diagnostic process, unlike in
acute exacerbation of asthma
where the PEF is key in determining the severity of the presentation.
The NICE guidelines on COPD recommend that the clinical assessment of patients with a suspected exacerbation is focussed on identifying the following features that could indicate that a patient is at risk of adverse outcomes and so should be managed in hospital:
Rapid onset of symptoms and/or severe breathlessness
Poor baseline functional status:
Poor level of activity or confined to bed
Unable to cope at home
Receiving long-term
oxygen therapy
(LTOT)
Presence of comorbidities:
Cardiac disease
Insulin-dependent diabetes mellitus
Findings on physical examination that indicate hypoxia and hypercapnia:
SpO2 < 90% on pulse oximetry
Presence of cyanosis
Worsening peripheral oedema (which could indicate worsening renal hypoxia)
Acute confusion
and/or impaired level of consciousness
Improve
Investigations
The investigation of acute exacerbation of
chronic obstructive pulmonary disease
(AECOPD) follows a systematic approach, starting with first-line investigations and progressing to more specific tests as required. The aim is to confirm the diagnosis, assess severity, identify triggers or contributing factors and guide appropriate treatment.
First-Line Investigations
Pulse oximetry:
This is an essential tool for assessing oxygen saturation levels in patients suspected of AECOPD. Low oxygen levels may indicate severe exacerbation.
Chest X-ray:
It helps exclude other causes of symptoms such as
pneumonia
or pneumothorax. However, it's not typically diagnostic for an AECOPD episode.
Blood gases:
Arterial blood gas (ABG) analysis can be performed if the patient is hypoxic on pulse oximetry or has clinical signs suggesting severe exacerbation. It provides information about the patient's oxygenation, carbon dioxide levels and acid-base status.
Full Blood Count (FBC):
This can help identify infection or anaemia which could contribute to the exacerbation.
Further Investigations
If initial tests are inconclusive or if there are features that suggest an alternative diagnosis, additional investigations may be warranted.
Sputum
culture:
If purulent sputum is present, sending a sample for microbiological analysis can identify potential pathogens including bacteria such as
Pseudomonas aeruginosa
,
Haemophilus influenzae
, and
Streptococcus pneumoniae
.
Spirometry:
Although not generally used in the acute setting due to practical limitations, spirometry can be useful in the post-exacerbation phase to assess the patient's lung function and guide long-term management.
CT scan:
This is not routinely used in AECOPD but may be considered if there is suspicion of other pathologies such as lung cancer or bronchiectasis.
It should be noted that while these investigations are important, the diagnosis of an acute exacerbation of COPD is primarily a clinical one, based on a history of worsening
respiratory
symptoms. Investigations are used to support this diagnosis, look for triggers and guide treatment rather than to diagnose the condition itself.
Guidelines
The British Thoracic Society (BTS) guidelines for the management of COPD recommend these investigations for suspected AECOPD. These guidelines also emphasise that clinical assessment remains paramount in managing patients with suspected AECOPD.
Note:
Always consider local antimicrobial resistance patterns when interpreting sputum culture results.
Improve
Differential diagnosis
Cardiac and
respiratory
causes of acute breathlessness should be considered when assessing a patient with a suspected exacerbation of
COPD
.
Pneumonia
Similarity - clinical presentation of
dyspnoea
and
cough
productive of purulent
sputum
. This can be difficult to distinguish from exacerbations of bacterial origin.
Difference - clinical and radiological findings of lung consolidation (bronchial breathing, increased vocal resonance and opacification seen on chest X-ray)
Pulmonary embolism
This is an important diagnosis to exclude as COPD is a risk factor for thromboembolism especially during exacerbations
Differentiating embolism from exacerbation - dyspnoea and hypoxia predominate cough and sputum production. Signs of lower limb venous thromboembolism such as calf swelling may be present
Pulmonary oedema
This could be either due to a myocardial infarction or a presentation of acute-on-chronic heart failure
Differentiating features - sputum may be frothy rather than purulent, with characteristic X-ray changes of alveolar and interstitial oedema
Improve
Management
The management of an acute exacerbation of
COPD
can be divided into 4 components.
1. Provision of
respiratory
support
The British Thoracic Society (BTS) recommends that prior to the availability of ABG results, all patients should be provided with supplemental oxygen titrated to achieve target saturations of 88-92%. Supplemental oxygen can be provided via either:
A 24% Venturi mask at 2-3 L/min
A 28% Venturi mask at 4 L/min
Nasal cannulae at 1-2 L/min
ABG measurements should be taken upon arrival in hospital and repeated after 30-60 minutes. If the pCO2 and pH values of the ABG measurement are normal, the target oxygen saturation can be adjusted to 94-98%. However, a target of 88-92% should be maintained if the patient has:
A history of previous Type 2 respiratory failure requiring
non-invasive ventilation
(NIV) or intermittent positive pressure ventilation
Oxygen saturation below 94% when clinically stable
Long-standing hypercapnia - raised pCO2 but with a pH of ≥ 7.35 and/or a bicarbonate level of > 28 mmol/mol
Patients with persistent hypercapnia and respiratory acidosis despite optimal medical management need to be started on NIV. The aim of NIV is to reverse the acidosis by providing pressure support for the airways during inspiration and expiration, leading to an overall improvement in gaseous exchange. BTS recommends that NIV is indicated if the following features are present 60 minutes after optimal supplemental oxygen and bronchodilation have been given:
Acidosis - pH < 7.35
Hypercapnia - pCO2 > 6.5
Respiratory rate > 23
Improvement in pH and reduction of the respiratory rate within the first 4 hours are key indicators of NIV success, otherwise, escalation to invasive mechanical ventilation (IMV) should be considered, especially if the following features are present:
Imminent respiratory arrest
Severe respiratory distress
Failure of NIV - persistent acidosis (pH < 7.25) and
tachypnoea
(RR > 35)
Persistent or worsening acidosis (pH < 7.15)
Depressed consciousness (GCS < 8)
Escalation to IMV may be deemed inappropriate after considering the patient's clinical status and wishes. In such cases, if NIV is adding to the patient's discomfort it should be discontinued and palliative care measures started.
2. Pharmacological management
Bronchodilation
Short-acting beta2 agonists (SABA) and/or short-acting muscarinic antagonists (SAMA) should be used initially. These can be delivered via an inhaler or nebuliser driven by air
Patients' long-acting beta2 agonists (LABA), long-acting muscarinic antagonists (LAMA) and/or inhaled corticosteroids (ICS) inhalers should be continued
NICE recommends that IV theophylline may be used if the response is inadequate and levels should be checked 24 hours after commencing treatment
Corticosteroids
NICE recommends a 5-day course of oral prednisolone
Antibiotics:
GOLD recommends that antibiotic therapy is given to patients who have all 3 of the major symptoms or have 2 major symptoms with increasing
sputum
purulence being one of them or require mechanical ventilation (invasive and non-invasive)
NICE suggests that the following factors be taken into account when prescribing an antibiotic - severity of symptoms, previous exacerbations and hospital admission history, previous culture results and risk of resistance
Choice of antibiotic - penicillin e.g. amoxicillin, macrolides e.g. clarithromycin and tetracyclines e.g. doxycycline are most commonly prescribed due to their effectiveness against
Haemophilus influenzae
and
Streptococcus pneumoniae
3. Optimising the patient for discharge
NICE recommends that the following steps are taken prior to discharge:
Measurement of spirometry
Optimisation of maintenance bronchodilator therapy
Satisfactory pulse oximetry and ABGs in patients who have had respiratory failure
Confirmation that the patient has returned to their functional baseline
Arrangement for follow-up and home care e.g. nurse visits
4. Prevention of exacerbations
The following interventions have been shown to be effective in reducing the frequency of exacerbations. While some are fundamentals of COPD care, GOLD suggests that they should be reinforced and others incorporated into patients' long-term management where appropriate:
Smoking cessation
Influenza and pneumococcal vaccination
Pulmonary rehabilitation
Broadly defined as an integrated programme consisting of supervised exercise training, smoking cessation, nutritional counselling and educating patients about self-management of their disease
A 6-8 week programme started within 2 weeks of discharge from hospital after an exacerbation has been shown to reduce readmission
Vitamin D supplementation
Supplementation in severe deficiency (< 10ng/ml) reduces exacerbation frequency by 50% due to Vitamin D's immune-modulating effects
Augmentation of long-acting bronchodilation with anti-inflammatory therapy
Inhaled corticosteroids - particularly effective with blood eosinophil counts of ≥ 100 cells/µL
Roflumilast (phosphodiesterase-4 inhibitor) - can be used as an alternative to inhaled corticosteroids if blood eosinophil counts < 100 cells/µL or added on to the medication of patients already on a combination of LABA, LAMA and ICS if they have been hospitalised for an exacerbation in the past year
Long-term macrolide
Azithromycin has been shown to be effective especially among non-smokers but is associated with an increased risk of bacterial resistance
Mucoregulators
Can be used as regular therapy in patients not receiving ICS
N-acetylcysteine and carbocysteine are common examples
Improve
References
NICE - 2018 COPD guidelines
Clinical Knowledge Summaries - Acute exacerbation of COPD guidelines
Respiratory
Acute exacerbation of COPD