Bronchiectasis
Bronchiectasis
Bronchiectasis is a chronic lung disease, characterised by irreversibly dilated bronchi alongside chronic bronchial inflammation and infection. It is comparatively rare among other lung conditions such as
COPD
and asthma.
Though it is commonly associated with a previous severe lower
respiratory
tract infection, such as pneumonia, it is idiopathic in almost half of all cases.
Patients typically present with a chronic productive
cough
that is associated with large amounts of
sputum
production and recurrent chest infections.
The mainstay of management is physiotherapy-taught airway clearance techniques (ACT) and extended courses of antibiotics to treat acute exacerbations.
Last updated: 19
th
December 2024
Epidemiology
Incidence: 15.00 cases per 100,000 person-years
Peak incidence: 70+ years
Sex ratio: 1:1
Condition
Relative
incidence
Asthma in adults
66.67
Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease
15.33
Bronchiectasis
1
Tuberculosis
0.60
<1
1-5
6+
16+
30+
40+
50+
60+
70+
80+
Aetiology
Various different causes of bronchiectasis have been identified and identification of the underlying aetiology can help guide management. The frequency of different causes, based on a systemic review of 56 studies including over 8600 patients, are listed below:
Idiopathic (45%)
Post-infection (30%)
Immunodeficiency (5%)
COPD
(4%)
Connective tissue diseases (4%)
Allergic bronchopulmonary aspergillus (2.5%)
Ciliary dysfunction (2.5%)
Asthma (1.5%)
Inflammatory bowel disease (1%)
Obstruction (1%)
Aspiration/oesophageal reflux (1%)
Congenital malformation (<1%)
Alpha-1 antitrypsin deficiency (<1%)
Diffuse panbronchiolotis (<1%)
Pink's disease (<1%)
Yellow nail syndrome (<1%)
This study combined data from different geographic regions and it is important to consider that some aetiologies are more prevalent in certain regions. For example in Europe, COPD accounted for 5% of cases compared with other regions where it accounted for less than 1% of cases.
Cystic fibrosis
Bronchiectasis associated with cystic fibrosis (CF) is managed as a distinct entity. When assessing a patient with suspected bronchiectasis, certain features in the history may point towards undiagnosed CF as the underlying aetiology. For example, if the bronchiectasis is early onset and there are associated features such as male infertility, a history of malabsorption and childhood steatorrhea.
Improve
Pathophysiology
Bronchiectasis can be
localised
(restricted to one lobe, e.g. in the case of an inhaled foreign body or tumour) or
generalised
(affecting multiple lobes).
Cole's '
vicious cycle hypothesis
' describes bronchiectasis as arising from a combination of genetic and environmental factors. It can be summarised as:
A deficit in mucociliary clearance +/- immune function
→
microorganism acquisition, colonisation and infection
→
chronic inflammation
→
dilation and thickening of bronchi
→
bronchial wall oedema and increased mucus production
→
more infections
→
further inflammation and damage.
Three morphological types of bronchiectasis were described by Reid in 1950:
Tubular/cylindrical:
believed to be the most common type, the morphology is of smooth uniform dilatation of the bronchi with loss of normal tapering. This type is associated with the 'signet ring sign' due to an increased bronchoarterial ratio and the 'tram-track sign' due to parallel bronchial walls.
Varicose:
relatively uncommon, the bronchi are irregular with dilatation interspersed with areas of constriction.
Cystic:
associated with
cystic fibrosis
, dilated bronchi that are cyst like and filled with either air or fluid.
Improve
Clinical features
The typical presentation of a patient with bronchiectasis is a
chronic productive
cough
on the background of
recurrent chest infections
. Patients are often lifelong non-smokers and are more likely to be female.
Key features of bronchiectasis include:
Persistent productive cough
(90-96%)
Daily
sputum
production
(75%)
Sputum may be mucopurulent or purulent
Mean daily sputum volume of 38 mL
Haemoptysis
(25-50%)
Recurrent chest infections
Other associated features include:
Rhinosinusitis symptoms (65-75% patients)
These include nasal discharge, nasal blockage or congestion, facial pain or pressure and reduced sense of smell or anosmia
Dyspnoea
(60% patients)
Chest pain (20-50% patients)
Chest pain in bronchiectasis is not well characterised. One study found that it is commonly associated with exacerbations, non-pleuritic in nature, affects both lower lobes and is mild-moderate in severity. Others have found it to be pleuritic or musculoskeletal chest pain, with the underlying origin of the pain unclear.
Gastro-oesophageal reflux disease (GORD; 20-40% patients)
GORD is a common co-morbidity in patients with bronchiectasis. IT has also been associated with increased severity of bronchiectasis although the underlying mechanism for this is not known.
A
respiratory
examination may reveal:
Crackles
(70-75%)
Wheeze
(20-35%)
Clubbing
(2-3%)
When taking a history and examining the patient, it is also important to consider other systems of the body too, as these may reveal
co-morbid conditions
associated with the development of bronchiectasis:
Joints: rheumatoid arthritis
GI manifestations: inflammatory bowel disease,
cystic fibrosis
(malabsorption, pancreatitis), gastro-oesophageal reflux disease
Improve
Investigations
NICE recommends the following initial investigations where bronchiectasis is suspected:
Sputum
culture
: may show colonising pathogens, most commonly
Haemophilus influenzae
and
Pseudomonas aeruginosa
.
Chest X-ray
: the majority of X-rays will be abnormal in those with bronchiectasis but findings are non-specific and further imaging is required. They are also useful for ruling out other possible causes such as TB or malignancy.
Post-bronchodilator spirometry
: most commonly an obstructive pattern is seen, although mixed, restrictive, and normal results are also possible.
Patients with suspected bronchiectasis should be referred to a
respiratory
consultant to confirm the diagnosis.
The gold standard diagnostic imaging for bronchiectasis is a
high-resolution computed tomography (CT) scan
or a
thin section CT scan
. CT findings indicative of bronchiectasis are those which show bronchial dilatation, including:
Bronchoarterial ratio > 1: the internal airway lumen is larger than the adjacent pulmonary artery
This is often referred to as the 'signet ring sign'
Lack of tapering: bronchi should taper in diameter as they travel distally from the lung hila to the periphery
Bronchus visible within 1cm of pleural surface: normal, non-dilated airways cannot usually be seen within 2cm of the pleura
Once bronchiectasis is confirmed, BTS recommends the following tests:
FBC, serum total IgE and assessment of sensitisation to
Aspergillus fumigatus
- to investigate for Allergic Broncho Pulmonary Aspergillosis (
ABPA
)
Serum immunoglobulin G (IgG), immunoglobulin A (IgA) and immunoglobulin M (IgM) - to investigate for immunodeficiency
Dependant on the clinical features, further tests to help elucidate the underlying cause may be conducted including:
Investigations for reflux and aspiration
Cystic fibrosis
test
Primary Ciliary Dyskinesia test
Specific antibody levels against capsular polysaccharides of
Streptococcus pneumoniae
Improve
Differential diagnosis
When formulating a diagnosis of bronchiectasis, differentials to consider are those conditions which can result in chronic
cough
.
COPD
:
Similarities: productive cough,
dyspnoea
Differences:
sputum
more likely to be clear except during an infective exacerbation, smoking history more strongly associated with COPD
Overlap: both conditions may co-exist. BTS guidelines advise considering investigations for bronchiectasis in COPD patients who frequent exacerbations and positive sputum culture for
Pseudomonas aeruginosa
Asthma
:
Similarities: cough, dyspnoea
Differences: episodes of dyspnoea and coughing may be associated with or exacerbated by particular triggers such as exercise or allergens, cough more likely to be dry
Overlap: both conditions may co-exist. In patients with asthma, BTS guidelines advise investigation for bronchiectasis may be appropriate in those with severe or poorly-controlled diseased
Lung cancer
:
Similarities: cough,
haemoptysis
, chest pain
Differences: weight loss, hoarse voice
Tuberculosis
:
Similarities: cough, haemoptysis
Differences: weight loss, night sweats
Rhinosinusitis and GORD are also differentials to consider, though they commonly co-occur with bronchiectasis (see the section on signs and symptoms).
Improve
Management
The initial management should involve:
Identifying and treating underlying cause
Airway clearance techniques +/- pulmonary rehabilitation
Annual influenza vaccine
Antibiotics for exacerbations
Self-management plan
Airway clearance techniques (ACT)
There are several ACTs that
respiratory
physiotherapists can teach to patients. The aim is to loosen and clear mucus from the lungs, improve ventilation and improve the efficiency of
cough
. Selecting a technique should be heavily guided by patient preference in order to improve adherence. According to a 2002 study, the most commonly taught airway clearance method is active cycle of breathing techniques (ACBT). Briefly, this involves a cycle of:
Breathing control â→ 3-5 deep breaths â→ 2-3 huffs â→ breathing control â→ cough
ACBT may also be used in conjunction with:
Manual techniques (percussion, vibration, shaking and over pressure)
Postural drainage / modified postural drainage (gravity-assisted positioning to aid with drainage of lungs)
Infective exacerbations
If a patient experiences
≥ 3 exacerbations
in one year despite following the initial management, then treatment should be escalated in a stepwise manner. The second step in management is a
physiotherapy reassessment
and consideration of
mucoactive treatment
. Beyond this, specialists may consider prescribing long-term antibiotic therapy.
Those with signs or symptoms of severe illness should be managed within secondary care. For patients that can be managed within primary care, NICE recommend to:
Collect a
sputum
sample
Send for microscopy, culture and sensitivity prior to commencing antibiotics.
Prescribe a 7-14 day course of antibiotics
Previous sputum sample culture and sensitivity results should guide initial antibiotic choice where available
If these are not available, follow local prescribing guidelines or prescribe amoxicillin 500mg tds or clarithromycin 500mg bd
Prescribe a short acting inhaled beta-2 agonist
If the patient has
wheeze
or
breathlessness
in the acute phase
Check airway clearance technique
If the patient has not been taught a technique, or cannot manage this alone, make an urgent to appointment to see a physiotherapist
Review the patients response to antibiotics
If the patient is
responding well
to antibiotics, do not change them
If the patient is
not responding to treatment
, change to a different antibiotic using the sputum culture and sensitivity results as a guide
Surgical management
When medical therapies fail to control symptoms despite being optimised by specialists, surgical management may be considered. For those with localised disease, lung resection may be considered. For diffuse bilateral disease, a lung transplant may be considered. BTS specify the following criteria for lung transplantation:
Aged 65 years or less and
FEV is <30% predicted with significant clinical instability or
Rapid progressive deterioration despite optimal medical management
Improve
Complications
The complications of bronchiectasis can be severe and often require diligent management. These complications primarily include:
Respiratory
failure:
Hypoxaemia and hypercapnia may develop due to ventilation-perfusion mismatch, leading to respiratory failure. This is a common complication in patients with advanced disease.
Pulmonary infections:
The abnormal dilatation of the bronchi predisposes to recurrent lower respiratory tract infections. Common pathogens include
Pseudomonas aeruginosa
,
H. influenzae
, and
S. pneumoniae
.
Hemoptysis:
Chronic inflammation and infection can cause erosion of the bronchial arteries, leading to hemoptysis, which can range from mild to life-threatening.
Pulmonary hypertension and cor pulmonale:
Chronic hypoxia can lead to pulmonary hypertension, which may eventually result in right-sided heart failure or cor pulmonale.
Beyond these primary complications, bronchiectasis can also lead to various systemic effects including:
Gastrointestinal issues:
Malabsorption and weight loss may occur due to increased caloric demand from chronic coughing and clearance of secretions.
Osteoporosis:
Chronic inflammation, malnutrition, hypogonadism, vitamin D deficiency, and use of corticosteroids for management may contribute to the development of osteoporosis in these patients.
Improve
References
Clinical Knowledge Summaries - Bronchiectasis guidelines
British Thoracic Society - 2018 Bronchiectasis guidelines
Respiratory
Bronchiectasis