Chronic mesenteric ischaemia
Chronic mesenteric ischaemia
Chronic mesenteric ischaemia (CMI) is a relatively rare clinical diagnosis due to its non-specific features and may be thought of as 'intestinal angina'.  It is most commonly seen in elderly patients with a history of smoking, hypertension, and hyperlipidemia. The symptoms of CMI include
abdominal pain
,
weight loss
,
nausea
,
vomiting
, and
diarrhoea
. The diagnosis of CMI is made through imaging studies such as CT angiography or magnetic resonance angiography. Treatment options for CMI include medical management, endovascular interventions, and surgical revascularization.
Last updated: 1
st
January 2025
Epidemiology
Incidence: 3.00 cases per 100,000 person-years
Peak incidence: 70+ years
Sex ratio: more common in females 2:1
<1
1-5
6+
16+
30+
40+
50+
60+
70+
80+
Clinical features
Patients with chronic mesenteric ischaemia often present with nonspecific symptoms that may be difficult to attribute solely to this condition. The classic triad of postprandial
abdominal pain
,
weight loss
, and food aversion is seen in only 20-40% of patients. However, these symptoms should prompt further evaluation for possible CMI.
Postprandial Abdominal Pain:
Patients often report severe, cramping abdominal pain that occurs within 30 minutes to 2 hours after eating. For this reason, it is sometimes referred to as 'intestinal angina'. The pain typically lasts for several hours and may be localized in the epigastric or periumbilical region. In some cases, the pain may be diffuse or poorly localized.
Weight Loss:
Significant weight loss often accompanies CMI due to a combination of reduced oral intake secondary to fear of provoking pain (sitophobia) and malabsorption as a result of ischemia-induced mucosal dysfunction.
Food Aversion (Sitophobia):
Patients may develop an aversion to eating because they associate food intake with the onset of abdominal pain.
Nausea
and
Vomiting
:
These symptoms can occur as a result of visceral hypersensitivity from ischemia-induced inflammation and oedema in the bowel wall.
Diarrhoea
:
Chronic mesenteric ischaemia can lead to malabsorption and diarrhoea due to mucosal dysfunction and impaired nutrient absorption.
Bloating and Abdominal Distension:
These symptoms may be secondary to the accumulation of gas and fluid in the bowel lumen as a result of ischemia-induced motility disturbances.
Physical examination findings in patients with chronic mesenteric ischaemia are often nonspecific, but some features may suggest the diagnosis:
Abdominal Bruit:
An abdominal bruit may be auscultated over the epigastric or periumbilical region, indicating turbulent blood flow through a stenotic or occluded mesenteric artery.
Signs of Malnutrition:
Weight loss, muscle wasting, temporal wasting, and peripheral oedema may be observed in patients with severe CMI who have experienced significant malabsorption and protein-losing enteropathy.
Abdominal Tenderness:
Mild to moderate tenderness on deep palpation of the abdomen may be present; however, this finding is not specific for CMI.
Improve
Colorectal surgery
Chronic mesenteric ischaemia