Colorectal cancer
Colorectal cancer
Colorectal
cancer
, a malignant tumour of the colon or rectum, is a significant health concern globally. Its pathogenesis primarily involves the adenoma-carcinoma sequence, with genetic alterations including
APC
,
KRAS
and
p53
mutations. Risk factors include age over 50, familial history, inflammatory bowel disease (IBD), diet high in red and processed meats and low in fibre, obesity, smoking and alcohol consumption. Clinical manifestations range from asymptomatic to non-specific symptoms like
abdominal pain
,
weight loss
or altered bowel habits. More specific signs include
rectal bleeding
or
anaemia
due to occult blood loss.
The gold standard for diagnosis is colonoscopy with biopsy. Staging utilises the TNM system; computed tomography (CT) scan of the chest, abdomen and pelvis provides further detail. Management depends on stage; options encompass surgery, chemotherapy and radiotherapy. In certain cases of metastatic disease, targeted therapies such as anti-EGFR or VEGF antibodies may be employed.
Last updated: 16
th
November 2023
Epidemiology
Incidence: 64.00 cases per 100,000 person-years
Peak incidence: 70+ years
Sex ratio: more common in males 1.3:1
Condition
Relative
incidence
Diverticulitis
3.91
Colorectal
cancer
1
Crohn's disease
0.17
Ulcerative colitis
0.16
<1
1-5
6+
16+
30+
40+
50+
60+
70+
80+
Pathophysiology
Location
Location of
cancer
(averages)
rectal: 40%
sigmoid: 30%
descending colon: 5%
transverse colon: 10%
ascending colon and caecum: 15%
Genetics
It is currently thought there are three types of colon cancer:
sporadic (95%)
hereditary non-polyposis colorectal carcinoma (HNPCC, 5%)
familial adenomatous polyposis (FAP, <1%)
Studies have shown that sporadic colon cancer may be due to a series of genetic mutations. For example, more than half of colon cancers show allelic loss of the APC gene. It is believed a further series of gene abnormalities e.g. activation of the K-ras oncogene, deletion of p53 and DCC tumour suppressor genes lead to invasive carcinoma
HNPCC, an autosomal dominant condition, is the most common form of inherited colon cancer. Around 90% of patients develop cancers, often of the proximal colon, which are usually poorly differentiated and highly aggressive. Currently seven mutations have been identified, which affect genes involved in DNA mismatch repair leading to microsatellite instability. The most common genes involved are:
MSH2 (60% of cases)
MLH1 (30%)
Patients with HNPCC are also at a higher risk of other cancers, with endometrial cancer being the next most common association, after colon cancer.
The Amsterdam criteria are sometimes used to aid diagnosis:
at least 3 family members with colon cancer
the cases span at least two generations
at least one case diagnosed before the age of 50 years
FAP is a rare
autosomal dominant
condition which leads to the formation of hundreds of polyps by the age of 30-40 years. Patients inevitably develop carcinoma. It is due to a mutation in a tumour suppressor gene called
adenomatous polyposis coli gene (APC)
, located on chromosome 5. Genetic testing can be done by analysing DNA from a patient's white blood cells. Patients generally have a total colectomy with ileo-anal pouch formation in their twenties.
Patients with FAP are also at risk from duodenal tumours. A variant of FAP called Gardner's syndrome can also feature osteomas of the skull and mandible, retinal pigmentation, thyroid carcinoma and epidermoid cysts on the skin
Improve
Clinical features
Presenting features of colorectal
cancer
include:
Change in bowel habits:
Patients with colorectal cancer may experience a change in their bowel habits, such as constipation,
diarrhoea
, or alternating between the two. They may also feel the need to have a bowel movement more frequently than usual.
Rectal bleeding
:
Blood in the stool or rectal bleeding is a common symptom of colorectal cancer. The blood may be bright red or melena.
Abdominal pain
and discomfort:
Patients with colorectal cancer may experience abdominal pain, cramping, or discomfort. This may be due to the tumour obstructing the bowel or causing inflammation.
Unexplained
weight loss
:
Patients with colorectal cancer may experience unexplained weight loss, which can be a sign of advanced disease.
Anaemia
:
Chronic bleeding from the tumour can lead to anaemia, which can cause
fatigue
, weakness, and shortness of breath.
Bowel obstruction:
In advanced cases, the tumour can completely obstruct the bowel, causing severe abdominal pain, nausea, and vomiting.
Improve
Referral criteria
NICE updated their referral guidelines in 2023 to make increased use of Faecal Immunochemical Test (FIT) testing, instead of always doing a colonoscopy first-line.
NICE recommend a FIT is used to guide referral in the following scenarios:
with an
abdominal mass
, or
with a
change in bowel habit
, or
with iron-deficiency
anaemia
, or
aged 40 and over with unexplained
weight loss
and
abdominal pain
, or
aged under 50 with
rectal bleeding
and either of the following unexplained symptoms:
abdominal pain
weight loss, or
aged 50 and over with any of the following unexplained symptoms:
rectal bleeding
abdominal pain
weight loss, or
aged 60 and over with anaemia even in the absence of iron deficiency.
Important points
FIT testing should be offered even if the person has previously had a negative FIT result through the NHS bowel
cancer
screening programme.
people with a rectal mass, an unexplained anal mass or unexplained anal ulceration do not need to be offered FIT before referral is considered.
Results of FIT test:
positive: patient should be referred on the suspected cancer pathway referral
negative:
safety netting
NICE recommend referring on suspected cancer pathway if ongoing significant concern (e.g. abdominal mass)
whilst not mentioned specifically in the guidance, it is clearly important to continue to investigate the symptoms and reach a definitive diagnosis
NHS screening
The NHS has a national screening programme offering screening every 2 years to all men and women aged 60 to 74 years in England, 50 to 74 years in Scotland.
Patients aged over 74 years may request screening
eligible patients are sent Faecal Immunochemical Test (FIT) tests through the post
a type of faecal occult blood (FOB) test which uses antibodies that specifically recognise human haemoglobin (Hb)
used to detect, and can quantify, the amount of human blood in a single stool sample
patients with abnormal results are offered a colonoscopy
The
FIT test is also recommended for patients with new symptoms who do not meet the 2-week criteria
listed above, for example:
patients >= 50 years with unexplained abdominal pain
OR
weight loss
patients < 60 years with changes in their bowel habit
OR
iron deficiency anaemia
patients >= 60 years who have anaemia even in the absence of iron deficiency
Improve
Management
Management strategies depend on the tumour's location, stage, histological type, and the patient's overall health status.
Staging
All patients with newly diagnosed colorectal
cancer
should have the following for staging:
carcinoembryonic antigen
(
CEA
)
CT of the chest, abdomen and pelvis
their entire colon should have been evaluated with colonoscopy or CT colonography
patients whose tumours lie below the peritoneal reflection should have their mesorectum evaluated with MRI.
The TNM (Tumour, Node, Metastasis) staging system is commonly used to stage CRC, aiding in prognosis and treatment planning. Once their staging is complete patients should be discussed within a dedicated colorectal MDT meeting and a treatment plan formulated.
Treatment of colonic cancer
Surgery
Cancer of the colon is nearly always treated with surgery
Resectional surgery is the only option for cure in patients with colon cancer.
The procedure is tailored to the patient and the tumour location as detailed below
Some patients may have confounding factors that will govern the choice of procedure, for example a tumour in a patient from a HNPCC family may be better served with a panproctocolectomy rather than segmental resection.
Anastomosis
Following resection the decision has to be made regarding restoration of continuity.
For an anastomosis to heal the key technical factors include; adequate blood supply, mucosal apposition and no tissue tension
Obstruction
When a colonic cancer presents with an obstructing lesion; the options are to either stent it or resect
In modern practice it is unusual to simply defunction a colonic tumour with a proximal loop stoma. This differs from the situation in the rectum (see below).
The operations for cancer are segmental resections based on blood supply and lymphatic drainage:
Site of cancer
Type of resection
Anastomosis
Caecal, ascending or proximal transverse colon
Right hemicolectomy
Ileo-colic
Distal transverse, descending colon
Left hemicolectomy
Colo-colon
Sigmoid colon
High anterior resection
Colo-rectal
Upper rectum
Anterior resection (TME)
Colo-rectal
Low rectum
Anterior resection (Low TME)
Colo-rectal
(+/- Defunctioning stoma)
Anal verge
Abdomino-perineal excision of rectum
None
Chemotherapy
Used in the neoadjuvant setting (particularly for rectal cancers), adjuvant setting, and for metastatic disease
Common regimens include FOLFOX and FOLFIRI.
Radiation Therapy
Predominantly used for rectal cancers in the neoadjuvant or adjuvant setting.
Targeted Therapies
Bevacizumab (anti-VEGF) and Cetuximab (anti-EGFR), particularly for metastatic disease
Emergency surgery
In the emergency setting where the bowel has perforated the risk of an anastomosis is much greater, particularly when the anastomosis is colon-colon. In this situation, an end colostomy is often safer and can be reversed later. When resection of the sigmoid colon is performed and an end colostomy is fashioned the operation is referred to as a Hartmann's procedure. Whilst left-sided resections are more risky, ileo-colic anastomoses are relatively safe even in the emergency setting and do not need to be defunctioned.
Improve
Screening and prevention
Overview
most cancers develop from adenomatous polyps. Screening for colorectal
cancer
has been shown to reduce mortality by 16%
the NHS offers home-based,
Faecal Immunochemical Test (FIT)
screening to older adults
another type of screening is also being rolled out - a
one-off flexible sigmoidoscopy
Faecal Immunochemical Test (FIT) screening
Key points
the NHS now has a national screening programme offering screening every 2 years to all men and women aged 60 to 74 years in England, 50 to 74 years in Scotland. Patients aged over 74 years may request screening
eligible patients are sent Faecal Immunochemical Test (FIT) tests through the post
a type of faecal occult blood (FOB) test which uses antibodies that specifically recognise human haemoglobin (Hb)
used to detect, and can quantify, the amount of human blood in a single stool sample
advantages over conventional FOB tests is that it only detects human haemoglobin, as opposed to animal haemoglobin ingested through diet
only one faecal sample is needed compared to the 2-3 for conventional FOB tests
whilst a numerical value is generated, this is not reported to the patient or GP, who will instead be informed if the test is normal or abnormal
patients with abnormal results are offered a colonoscopy
At colonoscopy, approximately:
5 out of 10 patients will have a normal exam
4 out of 10 patients will be found to have polyps which may be removed due to their premalignant potential
1 out of 10 patients will be found to have cancer
Flexible sigmoidoscopy screening
Key points
screening for bowel cancer using sigmoidoscopy is being rolled out as part of the NHS screening program
the aim (other than to detect asymptomatic cancers) is to allow the detection and treatment of polyps, reducing the future risk of colorectal cancer
this is being offered to people who are 55-years-old
NHS patient information leaflets refer to this as 'bowel scope screening'
patients can self-refer for bowel screening with sigmoidoscopy up to the age of 60, if the offer of routine one-off screening at age 55 had not been taken up
Improve
References
NICE - Cancer referral guidelines
Royal College of Physicians - 2012 Gastrointestinal oncology - what you need to know
Gut - Surveillance guidelines after removal of colorectal adenomatous polyps
Royal College of Physicians - 2012 Colonic polyps and an update on the bowel cancer screening programme
NHS - Bowel Cancer Screening Programme
Cancer
Colorectal cancer