Small bowel obstruction
Small bowel obstruction
Small bowel obstruction (SBO)
refers to a partial or complete blockage of the small intestine, disrupting the normal passage of contents. Aetiologies include adhesions, hernias, neoplasms, and inflammatory strictures secondary to Crohn's disease.
Patients typically present with
abdominal pain
, distension,
vomiting
, and
constipation
. Diagnosis is primarily confirmed via imaging modalities such as plain radiography or computed tomography (CT), which may reveal dilated loops of bowel proximal to the obstruction site.
Management strategies encompass both non-operative and surgical interventions. Initial treatment often involves fluid resuscitation, nasogastric decompression, and electrolyte correction. Surgical intervention becomes necessary in cases of strangulation, perforation, or when conservative management fails. Complications can include bowel ischemia, necrosis, and sepsis.
Last updated: 30
th
August 2023
Epidemiology
Incidence: 20.00 cases per 100,000 person-years
Peak incidence: 40-50 years
Sex ratio: 1:1
Condition
Relative
incidence
Acute appendicitis
5.50
Paralytic ileus
2.50
Acute pancreatitis
2.00
Small bowel obstruction
1
Large bowel obstruction
0.30
<1
1-5
6+
16+
30+
40+
50+
60+
70+
80+
Aetiology
Small bowel obstruction (SBO) is primarily caused by mechanical blockages that interrupt the normal flow of intestinal contents. These obstructions can be categorised into intrinsic, extrinsic, and intraluminal causes.
Intrinsic Causes:
Adhesions:
Postoperative adhesions are the leading cause of SBO, accounting for approximately 60-70% of all cases. They result from fibrous bands forming after abdominal surgery, particularly those involving the small bowel or pelvic region.
Tumours:
Malignant neoplasms such as carcinoid tumours, lymphomas, and metastatic cancers can lead to SBO. However, they are less common than adhesions.
Crohn's Disease:
This inflammatory bowel disease can cause strictures in the small intestine due to chronic inflammation and fibrosis.
Hernias:
Inguinal, femoral, incisional and internal hernias may trap a portion of the small bowel within an abnormal opening or defect in the abdominal wall or mesentery.
Extrinsic Causes:
Volvulus:
This involves a segment of the bowel twisting around its mesenteric axis causing luminal obstruction and potential strangulation. It is more commonly seen in regions with a high fibre diet.
Intussusception:
This occurs when one segment of the intestine telescopes into an adjacent segment. It is more common in children but when occurring in adults it often has an organic lesion as a lead point.
Intraluminal Causes:
Gallstone Ileus:
This is a rare cause of SBO occurring when a gallstone erodes through the gallbladder into the bowel causing an obstruction. It is more common in elderly women.
Bezoars:
These are conglomerations of indigestible material, such as vegetable fibres or certain medications, which accumulate within the gastrointestinal tract.
The risk factors for small bowel obstruction include previous abdominal or pelvic surgery, history of radiation therapy to the abdomen, Crohn's disease, and hernias. Certain demographic factors such as increasing age and female sex are also associated with a higher risk of developing SBO due to conditions like gallstone ileus.
Improve
Pathophysiology
Small bowel obstructions are caused by a blockage in the lumen of the gastrointestinal tract, meaning the normal passage and digestion of food contents are interrupted. As a result, the bowel distal to the obstruction will collapse. The bowel proximal will continue to dilate with the continuous build up and stasis of luminal contents and gas. It is the combination of the dilation of the intestine, and the continuing intestinal peristalsis, which leads to the colicky nature of the
abdominal pain
.
As luminal contents fail to pass through the bowel, it results in subsequent
nausea
and
vomiting
.
Often bilious in nature
Leads to loss of fluid, Na+, K+, H+ and Cl-
Results in a metabolic alkalosis, hypokalemia and hypovolemia
With time, bowel wall oedema forms, which compresses the intestinal veins and lymphatics, reducing the venous drainage of the bowel. As this occurs, it compresses intestinal arterioles and capillaries, preventing arterial perfusion to the bowel wall. This can lead to subsequent bowel ischaemia, infarction, necrosis, and perforation.
Improve
Clinical features
Symptoms
Absence of passing flatus (90%) or stool (80%)
Abdominal pain
(90%)
Ranges in severity
Often cramping in nature
Intermittent every 3-4 minutes. Constant pain may indicate bowel ischaemia.
Often precedes
vomiting
(constant pain may indicate bowel ischaemia)
Nausea
and vomiting (80%)
May be bilious
Abdominal distension
(65%)
Signs
Bowel sounds
Initially high pitched (tinkling)
Increased frequency
In delayed presentations, bowel sounds can be reduced due to secondary ileus
Abdominal tenderness
Fever and tachycardia (if hernia strangulation is the cause of obstruction)
In more proximal bowel obstructions, patients tend to present earlier. Characteristically,
abdominal pain
and
vomiting
are the predominant symptoms.
In distal small bowel obstructions, patients usually present after 2-3 days of abdominal pain. The predominant symptoms are
abdominal distension
and
constipation
.
In the case of a severe, complete and/or complicated obstruction, the common features include:
Complete obstipation
Severe lethargy
Fevers and rigors
Bilious vomiting
Tachycardia and tachypnoea
Improve
Investigations
Abdominal X-Ray
The ideal initial investigation for a suspected SBO is plain radiography, as it is a usually fast and reliable test to confirm the diagnosis.
Upright image
To assess for air-fluid levels and pneumoperitoneum
If not possible, UpToDate suggests a patient should be placed in lateral decubitus position to show free air and/or fluid levels
Supine image
Findings on x-ray consistent with SBO include:
Dilated bowel loops with/without air-fluid levels
Considered dilated if small bowel is >3cm diameter
Proximal bowel dilation and distal bowel collapse
Absence of gas in the abdomen
Due to complete filling of bowel loops with sequestered fluid
CT Scan
BMJ indicate that plain radiography can be poorly sensitive for early and low grade SBO
If there is a high clinical suspicion from the history and examination, and x-rays are negative, BMJ recommend ordering an abdominal CT scan also
Where possible, if available, BMJ suggest that CT scan should be used
instead
of plain radiography due to higher sensitivity as well as ability to identify the cause of the obstruction in the first place
Findings consistent with SBO include:
Dilated bowel loops proximal to the transition point
Small bowel diameter >3cm
Bowel wall thickening
>3mm
Collapsed bowel distal to transitional point
Pneumoperitoneum
Indicates perforation and therefore increased urgency of management
Submucosal oedema/haemorrhage
Additional investigations
Small bowel follow through (barium or gastrografin)
May also be therapeutic for SBO as well as diagnostic
If concerned about perforation, a water soluble contrast only should be used (e.g. gastrografin)
Presence of contrast in the large bowel at 24 hours post-administration predicts the resolution of a SBO with 97% sensitivity and 96% specificity
Improve
Differential diagnosis
There are a number of differential diagnosis for SBO, as while many patients will present with the classical symptom profile, the signs/symptoms can also be similarly present in a number of other conditions.
Large bowel obstruction
Similarities
Similar aetiologies to SBO e.g. adhesions, hernias
Both present with colicky
abdominal pain
and
vomiting
Differences
LBO more frequently caused by malignant tumours and volvulus
Faeculent vomiting is more frequently associated with LBO (late symptom)
Abdominal distention is more common in LBO
Typically the interval at which cramping pain occurs is longer
Paralytic ileus
Similarities
Present with abdominal pain, vomiting and
constipation
Both commonly caused by abdominal surgery
Differences
More frequently caused by
recent
abdominal surgery and medications (e.g. opioids)
Presents with diffuse, continual abdominal pain (rather than colicky abdominal pain)
Bowel sounds tend to be absent
Appendicitis
Similarities
Present with abdominal pain,
nausea
, and vomiting
Differences
Vomiting is non-bilious in nature
Usually are febrile, whereas SBO usually must be complete/complicated to cause a low-grade fever
Typically in younger patients with no previous surgical history
Pseudo-obstruction
Similarities
Present with abdominal distention,
nausea and vomiting
Differences
Often have chronic constipation, with diarrhoea (paradoxically) during acute episodes
Often a chronic condition with recurrent episodes
Improve
Management
The management of SBO can be divided into non-operative and operative strategies.
Non-operative Management
This is appropriate for patients with partial obstruction or complete obstruction without signs of strangulation or peritonitis.
Nasogastric tube: Decompression of the upper gastrointestinal tract should be initiated early to avoid
vomiting
, as well as to reduce gastric and small bowel distention
IV fluids and electrolyte repletion: To correct dehydration and electrolyte imbalances.
Nil by mouth: Until the resolution of the obstruction.
Observation: Close monitoring of the patient's symptoms, physical examination findings, and serial abdominal X-rays.
Serial examinations: To assess for signs of worsening obstruction or development of complications that would necessitate surgery.
Operative Management
Surgery is indicated in patients with complete obstruction with signs of strangulation, peritonitis, or ischemia, as well as in those who fail to improve with non-operative management after 48-72 hours. Approximately 1/4 of patients will not respond to non-operative management, and therefore will eventually require surgery.
Laparotomy or laparoscopy: The approach depends on the surgeon's expertise and the patient's anatomy and condition. Adhesiolysis is commonly performed.
Bowel resection: If nonviable bowel is encountered.
Postoperative Care
Nasogastric tube: Should be kept in place until bowel function returns.
Nutrition: Parenteral nutrition may be necessary initially, progressing to enteral nutrition as tolerated.
Thromboprophylaxis: With low molecular weight heparin.
Pain management: With a multimodal approach, including opioids, NSAIDs, and regional analgesia as appropriate.
Improve
Complications
If left untreated, small bowel obstructions can cause serious, life-threatening complications, leading to significant morbidity and mortality.
Bowel ischaemia
A change in the character of the pain (e.g. intermittent to continuous pain, increase in severity) or worsening of abdominal signs (e.g. rebound tenderness, guarding) should highlight the possibility of complications and the need for immediate intervention
If SBO is managed promptly, resolution tends to occur within 24-48 hours. However, beyond this time frame, without resolution, the risk of vascular compromise increases significantly.
Strangulation is the arguably one of most severe complications of SBO, occurring when bowel wall oedema compromises the perfusion of the intestine and necrosis follows
If this progresses further, it can result in bowel wall perforation, causing leakage of contents into the abdominal cavity, resulting in peritonitis, abdominal sepsis and potentially death
Sepsis
Increasingly more common if bowel perforation is present, sepsis can be a life-threatening condition and has a significant morbidity and mortality
Can result in multi-organ failure and therefore death
Short bowel syndrome
This complication occurs if surgical management of SBO is necessary, and requires a large portion of small intestine to be removed for appropriate management
With reduction in the surface area and distance for absorption of gastric nutrients, it essentially may lead a patient to require lifelong supplemental nutrition or intestinal transplantation
Improve
Colorectal surgery
Small bowel obstruction