Dengue fever
Dengue fever
Dengue is a globally important arbovirus transmitted by the aedes mosquito, with an estimated 100 million cases a year worldwide. Cases of dengue can be found in nearly all countries between the tropics of Cancer and Capricorn, with large yearly outbreaks in South East Asia and South America.
Vector control of the
Aedes
mosquito is challenging and dengue is seen as an emerging global threat.
Dengue largely affects the paediatric population but can present in adults. There is no human to human transmission.
Last updated: 1
st
January 2025
Epidemiology
Incidence: 0.60 cases per 100,000 person-years
Peak incidence: 20-30 years
Sex ratio: 1:1
<1
1-5
6+
16+
30+
40+
50+
60+
70+
80+
Aetiology
Dengue virus is a single-stranded RNA flavivirus with 4 different but closely related serotypes. It is contracted by a bite from an infected
Aedes
mosquito. Dengue cannot be transmitted from person to person directly.
Aedes
mosquitos are found throughout the tropics, which means dengue is endemic in many countries including:
Africa
The Americas
Western Pacific
South-East Asia
The main vector for dengue is the
Aedes aegypti
mosquito. There are also some other
Aedes
species including
Aedes albopictus
which can transmit dengue.
The
Aedes
mosquito is typically found in urban settings, increasing human exposure and risk of contracting dengue. The mosquitos:
Rest and breed indoors
Lay eggs in containers e.g. tyres
Very drought-resistant eggs
Limited flight range (<100m)
Prefer to bite humans
Diurnally active
Bed nets less effective
The major risk factors for developing dengue are:
Visiting a dengue-endemic region
High population density
Poor standards of hygiene
Severe dengue is more likely to develop in:
Children under 15 years old
Repeated dengue infections
Specific viral genotypes
Malnourished children.
Improve
Pathophysiology
Dengue virus is the most important arbovirus worldwide. It is:
Single-stranded RNA virus
Within Flavivirus genus
Has 4 different but closely related serotypes (DEN-1, DEN-2, DEN-3, DEN-4)
May also be 5th genotype
DEN-2 and DEN-3 (Asian serotypes) often associated with severe disease
Especially if the dengue infection is a secondary infection.
Dengue has a 4-10 day incubation period after the bite from an infected mosquito. Viral multiplication occurs in macrophages, monocytes, and B cells. Can also happen in mast cells, dendritic cells, and endothelial cells. Patients can only transmit the infection via the
Aedes
for 4-5 days (maximum 12 days).
No direct human to human transmission
Lifelong immunity to 1 specific viral serotype develops after infection. However, there is an increased risk of severe dengue in subsequent infections with different serotypes. This is called antibody-dependent enhancement.
Unclear mechanism
Only in 2-4% of patients
Initial presentation of dengue is with flu-like illness
Fever
typically starts on day 3
Lasts for 5-6 days  (viraemic phase)
Can then recover or progress to severe dengue
Mild haemorrhagic symptoms
Dengue fever is rarely fatal
The major pathophysiological process in severe dengue is increased vascular permeability due to capillary leakage causing plasma leakage into tissues. This leads to:
Cytokine response
Suppression of T- cell response
Improve
Clinical features
Dengue can be asymptomatic (75%) or present as a non-specific febrile illness (25%), especially in young children. Dengue has a broad clinical spectrum ranging from a mild flu-like illness to severe haemorrhagic, shock and multi-organ failure.
The current classification system is the 2009 World Health Organisation scheme described below. This has superseded the previous classifications of dengue
fever
, dengue haemorrhagic fever and dengue shock syndrome.
1.
Non-severe dengue: fever followed by recovery
Without warning signs
Fever with two of the following:
Nausea/vomiting
Rash
Aches and pains
Positive tourniquet test
Leukopenia
With warning signs
Abdominal pain
or tenderness, persistent vomiting, clinical fluid accumulation, mucosal bleed, lethargy, restlessness, liver enlargement >2cm, increasing haematocrit with reducing platelets
The initial presentation of dengue is:
Intermittent high pyrexias 'break-bone fever' lasting 3-7 days
Arthralgia
Rash
Typically blanching maculopapular erythematous rash similar to measles or scarlet fever
May develop into petechiae
Other bleeding manifestations including
Bleeding gums
Epistaxis
GI bleeds
Other features may be quite non-specific and can include:
Headache
Nausea & vomiting
Lymphadenopathy
Generalised
myalgia
Backache
Ocular manifestations:
Retro-orbital pain
Conjunctival injection
Conjunctivitis
2.
Severe dengue (5% of patients)
dengue with severe plasma leakage, severe haemorrhage and severe organ impairment.
Severe symptoms may include:
Pulmonary and facial oedema
Ascites
Pleural effusions
Meningism including photophobia
Worsening or more profuse haemorrhage
Improve
Investigations
The investigations used will depend on the resources available and the clinical setting but the majority of investigations are likely to be performed in secondary care.
Blood tests tend to show
thrombocytopenia
(up to 80%, although may be mild) and
leucopenia
(also up to 80%, tends to improve after day 5) for the majority of all patients (severe and non-severe). Haematocrit can be a useful monitoring tool, with increasing haematocrit often reflective of clinical deterioration.
Other bloods may show:
Prolongation of APTT and PT
Deranged U&E's
Elevated LFTs especially AST
Diagnosis can be confirmed by:
Viral isolation from serum
Sample needs to be collected early during the viraemic period (before day 5)
PCR (where available)
Antibody detection using ELISA: IgM and IgG
Can be used after day 5
Form used in rapid testing kits
Allow distinguishing of primary (first flavivirus exposure) from secondary (previously exposed to different flavivirus)
The tourniquet test can also be used but is only positive about 1/3 of patients, with a specificity of 71%. It can be used in low resource settings with limited access to serological testing.
Inflate a BP cuff to halfway between systolic and diastolic pressure for 5 mins
A positive test shows 20+ petechiae in a 2.5cm square on the forearm
Improve
Differential diagnosis
The differential diagnosis can be incredibly broad and will vary depending on the stage of clinical presentation. A clear travel history is vital for these patients.
Dengue often presents with a mild flu-like illness which may be difficult to separate from many other common viral illnesses in UK practice.
Consider travel history and vaccination status
Common UK viral illnesses may include:
Influenza
Infectious mononucleosis
Enterovirus
Measles
Rubella
Common and important tropical infections to consider include:
Viral
Chikungunya
Joint swelling more prominent feature
Zika
Often mild or no
fever
Purulent conjunctivitis
Other viral haemorrhagic fevers e.g. Lassa fever, Ebola
Often geographically localised, especially in West Africa
Acute HIV seroconversion
Consider risk factors for HIV e.g. high risk sexual activities
Parasitic
Malaria
Bacterial
Typhoid
Often presents with GI symptoms
Rickettsia infections (typhus, scrub typhus)
Leptospirosis
Consider water exposure
Meningococcal septicaemia
Meningism
Consider immunisation history and contact exposure
Other
Autoimmune diseases (e.g. SLE)
Adverse drug reaction
Improve
Management
Patients presenting with suspected dengue
fever
should be seen or discussed with the infectious disease team to exclude other differentials, and because of the risk of clinical deterioration.
There is no specific treatment for dengue. Antivirals and steroids have not been shown to improve outcomes.
There is no direct human to human transmission so no requirement for isolation.
Non-severe cases:
Conservative treatment with oral fluid and paracetamol
Avoid aspirin
Increased haemorrhage risk
Should also be avoided in children due to risk of Reye's syndrome
Severe cases (uncommon in returned travellers):
IV fluids
Used to restore circulatory volume due to plasma leakage into third space
Regular observation and monitoring of haematocrit, platelets and renal function
May require High Dependency or Intensive Care
Deterioration may be rapid (over several hours)
Severe GI haemorrhage
Rare
Will require blood transfusion +/- FFP
Preventative measures:
Use of personal protection equipment
DEET
Long-sleeved clothing
Vaccine but it is not currently recommended for use
Potential to precipitate more severe cases of dengue in people who have been immunised.
Improve
Complications
The major complication is the potential development of severe dengue. This presents with severe multi-organ involvement, haemorrhage and shock.
50% mortality rate if untreated.
Reduced to under 5% with treatment.
The usual mortality rate of dengue is <1%.
Patients can also develop:
Hepatic failure
Encephalopathy
Myocarditis
Disseminated intravascular coagulation
Septicaemia
Improve
References
Royal College of Physicians - 2011 Dengue fever review
Postgraduate Medical Journal - Review of dengue fever
Infectious diseases
Dengue fever