Syphilis
Syphilis
Syphilis is a sexually transmitted disease caused by the spirochaetal bacterium
Treponema pallidum
which enters the body through a break in the skin or mucous membranes following contact with an individual with early (primary or secondary) syphilis. Congenital infection may occur through maternal transmission during pregnancy.
Historically, syphilis has been a highly stigmatised disease, due to its association and proliferative spread through prostitution. Untreated syphilis can cause considerable morbidity such as cardiovascular and neurological disease.
Nowadays, the majority of patients present with a painless anogenital ulcer and are treated appropriately without progression from primary to secondary syphilis.
Last updated: 23
rd
May 2023
Epidemiology
Incidence: 10.00 cases per 100,000 person-years
Peak incidence: 30-40 years
Sex ratio: more common in males 8:1
Condition
Relative
incidence
Genital herpes
30.00
Syphilis
1
Chancroid
0.01
<1
1-5
6+
16+
30+
40+
50+
60+
70+
80+
Aetiology
Syphilis is a sexually transmitted infection (STI) caused by the spirochete bacterium
Treponema pallidum
subspecies
pallidum
. The primary mode of transmission is through sexual contact; however, it can also be transmitted from mother to child during pregnancy or at birth, resulting in congenital syphilis.
Risk Factors
Unprotected sexual intercourse:
Engaging in unprotected vaginal, anal or oral sex increases the risk of acquiring syphilis. The bacterium can enter the body through minor cuts or abrasions in the skin or mucous membranes.
Multiple sexual partners:
Having multiple sexual partners or engaging in casual sex increases the probability of exposure to infected individuals.
Co-infection with HIV:
Individuals infected with HIV are more susceptible to contracting syphilis due to compromised immune systems. Moreover, co-infection can complicate treatment and progression of both diseases.
Men who have sex with men (MSM):
Statistically, MSM represent a significant proportion of reported syphilis cases. This group tends to have higher rates of incidence due to factors such as higher prevalence within the community and practices that facilitate transmission.
Pregnancy:
Pregnant women infected with syphilis can transmit the disease to their unborn child, leading to congenital syphilis. This underscores the importance of prenatal screening for STIs.
The underlying cause of all forms of syphilis is infection with
T. pallidum
. Risk factors only increase an individual's susceptibility and likelihood of exposure to the bacterium. Understanding these risk factors is essential in formulating effective prevention strategies and interventions.
Improve
Pathophysiology
Treponema pallidum
initiates infection via microscopic abrasions allowing access to subcutaneous tissues.
Evasion of early host defences allows the bacterium to establish the initial ulcerative lesion that characterises primary syphilis, the
chancre
The primary ulcer contains the
Treponema pallidum
bacterium
Initial infiltration of the lesion is with polymorphonuclear leukocyte
Infiltration appears to coincide with the resolution of the primary chancre which occurs over 3-6 weeks
Secondary syphilis is caused by the haematogenous spread of the bacterium resulting in endarteritis obliterans.
Immune complexes of antibodies, spirochetal components and complement are present in arterial walls
Mucocutaneous lesions in secondary syphilis also contain treponemes
Resolution is likely due to macrophage driven and cell-mediated immunity.
Approximately 15-40% of patients with untreated secondary syphilis progress to late syphilis involving
Neurosyphilis
Chronic inflammation of the meninges due to the presence of treponemes
Parenchymal involvement of the spinal cord results in tabes dorsalis, predominantly due to dorsal column loss
Parenchymal involvement with neuronal loss will result in general paresis.
Gummatous syphilis
Characterised pathologically by the presence of granulomas, consistent with a cellular hypersensitivity reaction
Cardiovascular syphilis
A consequence of vasculitis of the vasa vasorum
Lymphocytes and plasma cells infiltrate blood vessels and perivascular tissues
Occlusion of the aortic vasa vasorum causes necrosis of the tunica media and weakening of the aortic wall leading to aortic aneurysms.
Narrowing of the coronary ostia typically results in aortic regurgitation.
Improve
Clinical features
Early syphilis
is defined as the first 2 years after infection and includes 3 stages:
(1)
Primary syphilis
is how the majority of patients will present
It is characterised by:
A painless
chancre
, which is a highly infectious, hard anogenital ulcer
Local lymphadenopathy
The chancre forms at the site of entry of bacterium and develops about 3 weeks post exposure
The chancre may be hidden within the vagina or rectum
The chancre heals within approximately 3 to 6 weeks
(2)
Secondary syphilis
(6 weeks - 6 months post infection) is systemic involvement and might present with a wide range of clinical features:
Symmetrical maculopapular rash
, typically on the trunk, face, palms or soles
90% have some skin involvement
Might be scaly
Constitutional symptoms including fever, malaise, myalgia, fatigue, and arthralgia (25%)
Lymphadenopathy
Tonsillitis
Condylomata lata (flat papules around/ beyond the genitals)
Oral snail-track ulcers
Alopecia
Hepatitis (33%)
Hepatosplenomegaly
Rhinitis
Uveitis
Optic neuritis
Meningism (1-2%)
Glomerulonephritis
Periosteitis
(3)
Early latent syphilis
is confirmed infection in the absence of any current clinical features.
If left untreated, early syphilis might progress to
tertiary or late syphilis
(defined as more than 2 years after infection).
This is described further within the complications section, as only 15-30% of untreated patients will go on to develop the complications of tertiary syphilis.
In the late stage, the disease may damage the brain, nerves, eyes, heart, blood vessels, liver, bones, and joints
These problems may occur many years after the original, untreated infection.
Improve
Investigations
Investigating a patient with suspected syphilis involves a series of steps, beginning with first-line investigations and potentially advancing to further diagnostic measures. Understanding these procedures is essential for effective diagnosis and treatment.
First-line Investigations
The initial investigation of syphilis typically involves serological testing, which includes both treponemal and non-treponemal tests:
Treponemal tests:
These are specific for
Treponema pallidum
, the bacterium that causes syphilis. Examples include T. pallidum particle agglutination assay (TPPA) and enzyme immunoassay (EIA). A positive result suggests exposure to the bacteria but does not distinguish between current or past infection.
Non-treponemal tests:
These measure the response to cellular damage caused by the infection rather than directly detecting the bacterium. The Rapid Plasma Reagin (RPR) test and Venereal Disease Research Laboratory (VDRL) test are examples. These tests can be used to monitor disease progression and response to treatment as they often correlate with disease activity.
Further Investigations
If serology results suggest syphilis, further investigations may be necessary depending on clinical presentation:
Darker field microscopy:
This can be used in primary syphilis if there is a visible lesion such as a chancre. A sample from the lesion can be examined under dark-field microscopy to look for
Treponema pallidum
.
Cerebrospinal fluid examination:
In cases of suspected neurosyphilis, a lumbar puncture may be performed to examine cerebrospinal fluid (CSF). The CSF VDRL test is highly specific for neurosyphilis, but it may be negative in early infection. Therefore, abnormal CSF cell count or protein level combined with a positive blood VDRL or FTA-ABS test may suggest neurosyphilis.
HIV testing:
As syphilis and HIV often coexist due to shared modes of transmission, an HIV test should be offered to all patients with syphilis.
Improve
Differential diagnosis
Syphilis is often referred to as the 'great imitator' due to its ability to mimic many other diseases, particularly those that present with anogenital ulcers or sores. Due to this, any anogenital sore or ulcer should be suspected syphilis until proven otherwise.
The two main differentials are:
Chancroid
: most common cause of genital ulcers worldwide
Similarities: initially painless papule
Differences: recent travel to subtropical or tropical areas, develops into a tender and painful ragged deep ulcer or pustule after several weeks, accompanied by inguinal lymphadenopathy that may suppurate
Genital herpes
Similarities: anogenital sore or blister, localised lymphadenopathy
Differences: typically painful, one or more sore(s) around genitals and mouth, lymphadenopathy is usually tender,
Herpes and syphilis are notoriously difficult to distinguish and a herpes virus PCR should be performed
Other differentials that should be considered include:
Primary HIV infection
Similarities: maculopapular rash, may present with a genital ulcer
Psoriasis
Similarities: maculopapular rash
Alopecia areata
Similarities: alopecia
Oral cancer
Similarities: snail tract lesions
More unusual causes of genital ulcers: lymphogranuloma venereum, granuloma inguinale, candidiasis, trauma, Reiter's syndrome, Behçet's syndrome, fixed-drug eruption, and scabies
Improve
Staging
- Early syphilis occurs before 2 years of infection
Primary syphilis
is characterised by generalised lymphadenopathy and a chancre
Secondary syphilis
occur 3-12 weeks after appearance of the initial chancre and is characterised by systemic features, skin lesions, alopecia, and mucous patches
Early latent syphilis
is serological confirmation of infection in the absence of clinical features
Tertiary or late syphilis occurs after 2 years of infection (typically 15-40 years)
Tertiary syphilis
may present with gummatous syphilis, cardiovascular syphilis or neurosyphilis
Tertiary latent syphilis
is serological confirmation of  infection in the absence of clinical features
Improve
Management
NICE guidelines recommend all patients with suspected syphilis should be referred to a genito-urinary medicine (GUM) clinic or other specialist local sexual health service.
Currently recommended first-line treatments for syphilis (including parenteral benzathine and procaine penicillin) are not readily available for use in primary care.
(1)
Explanation
of the condition, risk factors, methods of prevention and complications should be provided for the patient
(2)
Avoidance of all sexual contact
until either
Diagnosis is excluded OR
Successful treatment has been confirmed
(3)
Contact tracing
and partner notification should be discussed at diagnosis
(4) Consideration of
testing for HIV infection
in addition to
full sexual health screen
Co-infection leads to higher risk of treatment failure
If diagnosis is confirmed:
(5)
Benzathine benzylpenicillin
1.8g IM 2-3 doses, 1 week apart
Alternative: Doxycycline 100mg/12h
14 days for early syphilis
28 days for late syphilis
In pregnancy: Erythromycin 500mg/6h PO
(6)
Follow up
at 3, 6, and 12 months in specialist GUM clinic
Improve
Complications
Around 30% of patients who are untreated or have the failure of treatment of primary or secondary syphilis progress to late tertiary symptomatic syphilis.
Late syphilis
typically follow at least a 2 year latency period, where patients are non infectious. Patients may present with
Gummas
(16% of untreated patients): granulomas in skin, mucosa, bone, joints, and viscera such as the lung and testis
These granulomatous rubbery lesions have a necrotic centre and may gradually replace normal tissue.
Cardiovascular disease
(10% of untreated patients): ascending aortic aneurysm or aortic regurgitation
Neurosyphilis
(6% of untreated patients): might present in three separate ways
Meningovascular
: cranial nerve palsies e.g. decreased vision, stroke
General paresis of insane
: dementia, psychosis
Tabes dorsalis
: loss of proprioception, vibration sense, incontinence and ataxia
Improve
Screening and prevention
Any anogenital ulcer or sore should be investigated as suspected syphilis until proven otherwise.
Preventative measures include:
Increased use of condoms
Avoidance of drugs and alcohol when having sex
Risk reduction counselling and regular syphilis screening for people at high risk
Available through GUM
Early recognition of clinical features of syphilis, prompt treatment and prophylactic treatment of exposed contacts
All pregnant females are screened for syphilis as part of routine antenatal care.
Improve
References
Clinical Knowledge Summaries - Syphilis guidelines
DermNet NZ - Syphilis images
British Association for Sexual Health and HIV - UK National Guidelines on the Management of Syphilis 2015
DermIS.net - Picture of condylomata lata
Infectious diseases
Syphilis