Viral gastroenteritis
Viral gastroenteritis
Viral gastroenteritis is an acute inflammation of the lining of the stomach and small intestine, resulting from viral infection. The most common causative organism in adults is
norovirus
, while in children it is
rotavirus
. It is very common, being the most frequent cause of acute
diarrhoea
in the general population.
Viral gastroenteritis is a
clinical diagnosis
which presents with a self-limiting episode of diarrhoea,
nausea
and
vomiting
lasting <14 days. Risk factors for infection include exposure to contaminated food and water sources, close contact with infected individuals and poor hygiene.
The most important aspect of treatment is preventing, or correcting dehydration. Fluid balance should be assessed and oral rehydration solutions may be useful in replacing lost fluid and electrolytes.
Last updated: 13
th
December 2023
Epidemiology
Incidence: 5000.00 cases per 100,000 person-years
Peak incidence: 30-40 years
Sex ratio: 1:1
Condition
Relative
incidence
Viral gastroenteritis
1
Campylobacter infection
0.01
Giardiasis
0.01
Non-typhoidal
Salmonella
0.01
Shigellosis
0.001
<1
1-5
6+
16+
30+
40+
50+
60+
70+
80+
Aetiology
The most common cause of viral gastroenteritis in
children
is
rotavirus
, which rarely affects adults due to long lasting immunity.
In the UK, almost every child will have had infection before their 5th birthday.
Transmission is person to person, by the faecal-oral route or from environmental contamination.
Since 2013, an oral rotavirus vaccine was added as part of the UK national childhood immunisation programme.
This is >85% effective at preventing severe rotavirus infection in the first two years of life.
The most common cause of viral gastroenteritis in
adults
is
norovirus
, which is easily transmitted between one person to another.
Transmission is usually by the faecal-oral route, but can also be caused by contact with an infected person, or with contaminated food or water.
Norovirus can spread rapidly in semi-closed spaces such as in hospitals, residential homes or schools.
Unlike
rotavirus
infection, there is no long lasting immunity.
Other less common viral agents include:
Adenovirus
(in children)
Sapovirus
(in adults)
Risk factors include:
Exposure to contaminated food and water sources
Close contact with an infected individual
Poor hygiene
Immunocompromise
Improve
Pathophysiology
The clinical manifestation of viral gastroenteritis are due to the effects of the virus itself, along with cytotoxins on the
enterocytes
of the small intestine.
Viruses use the enterocytes to replicate
Replication within the enterocytes results direct damage and structural changes to the villous epithelium
This causes a disruption to the secretion/absorption function of the villous epithelium in the small bowel.
Viral ingestion â→ colonisation of the intestinal enterocytes â→ viral replication within the enterocyte â→ interference of the intestinal brush border enzyme production â→ transudation of fluid and electrolytes into the intestinal lumen â→ secretion of viral enterotoxins â→ transient chloride secretion into the intestinal lumen â→ malabsorption and osmotic
diarrhoea
.
Infectious viral particles are then shed in the faeces after 24 hours of symptoms and may continue to be excreted for over a week in some cases.
Improve
Clinical features
Viral gastroenteritis is a self-limiting condition which lasts
<14 days.
The most common symptoms include:
Acute
diarrhoea
This is the passage of 3 or more stools per day, for a duration of less than 14 days.
Watery and non-bloody
The presence of blood in the stool should raise suspicion of an alternative diagnosis, such as Shiga-toxin producing
E-coli
or
Campylobacter
infection.
Vomiting
(80%)
Mild
fever
(40%)
A temperature >39Â°C in adults or >38Â°C in children under 3 months old should raise suspicion of bacterial pathology.
Any child under 3 months old with a temperature >38Â°C should be
urgently
admitted to hospital.
Abdominal pain
A short viral prodrome may occur before the onset of diarrhoea, consisting of mild fever and
nausea
or vomiting.
The findings on examination largely depend on the level of dehydration that the patient is suffering. Some clinical signs of
significant dehydration
might include:
Dry mucous membranes
Tachycardia
Hypotension
A thin, thready pulse
Reduced urine output
Improve
Investigations
The diagnosis of viral gastroenteritis is
clinical
and thus investigations are not usually warranted.
If the patient shows signs of fluid depletion then blood tests should be taken before commencing IV fluid therapy:
Full blood count
Urea and electrolytes
Usually stool samples are
not required
in cases of acute, viral gastroenteritis. However, NICE recommend that a stool sample for microbiological diagnosis might be required in
some
patients when there is:
Diarrhoea
which is persistent, lasting  >14 days
Blood or pus in the stool
High suspicion of non-viral gastroenteritis
Recent history of hospitalisation and antibiotic therapy
Recent foreign travel history
Improve
Differential diagnosis
Bacterial gastroenteritis
: usually presents with high
fever
and severe
diarrhoea
, which is commonly bloody.
The most common causative bacteria in the UK is
Campylobacter jejuni
, but other pathogens frequently associated include
Salmonella
species,
E-coli
and
Shigella
.
Campylobacter
typically contaminates undercooked meat (especially poultry), unpasteurised milk and untreated water.
E-coli
is usually harmless, but it is important to be aware that
E-coli
O157:H7 infection can progress to haemolytic uraemia syndrome. Typically
E-coli
is acquired from undercooked beef products (such as beef burgers) and can be transmitted from person to person by direct contact.
Suspicion of bacterial infection warrants stool microscopy and culture to differentiate.
Typically episodes are self-limiting and do not require antibiotic therapy.
Food poisoning
is also usually caused by bacterial contamination of food products, but symptoms are caused primarily by toxins produced by the organism, rather than the organism itself. Diarrhoea and
vomiting
begin much more quickly (with 12 hours of ingestion) and common organisms include:
Staphylococcus aureus:
from undercooked meats and cream products.
Bacillus cereus:
from reheated rice.
Clostridium difficile
infection:
causes diarrhoea, significant
abdominal pain
and leukocytosis in patients with a history of recent antibiotic use. Diagnosis should be confirmed with a stool sample and treatment is with metronidazole for the first episode, and vancomycin for any subsequent recurrences.
Inflammatory bowel disease
: a first time presentation of IBD is often with bloody diarrhoea but there is usually no vomiting and a fever is unlikely.
Irritable bowel syndrome
: usually presents with periods of diarrhoea, abdominal pain and
bloating
related to consumption of food and often relieved by defecation.
Coeliac disease
: causes bloody diarrhoea and abdominal pain, usually in children. It is associated with the consumption of gluten and symptoms are relieved by its eradication from the diet.
Hyperthyroidism
: may cause diarrhoea in adults and is often associated with other features such as weight loss, insomnia, heat intolerance and sweating.
Improve
Management
The NICE guidelines on managing suspected viral gastroenteritis are based on:
Assessing for features of dehydration and shock
Fluid resuscitation if severe
Considering the need for hospital admission
Enabling rehydration and electrolyte replacement
Preventing the spread of infection
First there should be an assessment of whether urgent
fluid resuscitation
may be required. Indicators include:
Systolic blood pressure <100
Heart rate >90
Cool peripheries
Respiratory rate >20
NEWS score >5
There may also be other indicators that a patient should be
admitted to hospital
for management, such as:
If they are unable to to maintain oral intake due to
vomiting
Some elderly individuals >60 years old, who are more at risk of severe dehydration
Abdominal tenderness
Diarrhoea
lasting 10 days or more
If the above don't apply then the majority of healthy patients can be managed
at home
.
The management of viral gastroenteritis is based on
symptomatic support
and fluid/electrolyte replacement. Advice for patients should include encouraging a good level of oral intake, including fruit juices and soups and eating small, non-fatty meals as per their appetite.
Oral rehydration salts can be recommended if a patient is at high risk of poor outcomes.
These patients are generally those in whom hypovolaemia could pose a significant problem such as those with cardiovascular disease or thrombotic disease.
In order to try to combat viral spread, it is important that patients are given good advice on hygiene at home such as washing the hands thoroughly with soap and water, not sharing towels or flannels, washing soiled clothing separately and disinfecting high contact surfaces such as doorhandles regularly.
Patients who work in institutional settings such as in hospitals, schools or care homes should
not return to work
until at least 48 hours after vomiting and diarrhoea have stopped.
Improve
Complications
Patient at risk of complications from viral gastroenteritis tend to be those at the extremities of age, with multiple co-morbidities or the immunocompromised.
Dehydration and electrolyte disturbances
: this can occur if the fluid lost in the stool is not replaced.
If not managed appropriately, severe dehydration can result in renal injury, persistent acidosis and circulatory failure.
The most common electrolyte disturbances include sodium abnormalities and hypokalaemia.
Severe dehydration can also potentiate other problems, such as thrombotic phenomena.
Acute kidney injury
: can be caused by severe hypotension and a reduction in renal perfusion. This can result in dialysis in a small number of patients.
Lactose intolerance
: may occur transiently after a viral gastroenteritis, due to a loss of brush border enzymes.
This can last for several weeks or be permanent in some cases
Management involves removing lactose from the diet and slowly reintroducing it after a few weeks, if tolerated.
Improve
Infectious diarrhoea
Viral gastroenteritis