Acute heart failure
Acute heart failure
Acute
heart failure
(AHF) is life-threatening emergency.  AHF is a term used to describe the sudden onset or worsening of the symptoms of heart failure. Thus it may present with or without a background history of pre-existing heart failure.  AHF without a past history of heart failure is called de-novo AHF. Decompensated AHF is more common (66-75%) and presents with a background history of HF.
Last updated: 4
th
June 2024
Epidemiology
Incidence: 200.00 cases per 100,000 person-years
Peak incidence: 70+ years
Sex ratio: 1:1
Condition
Relative
incidence
Acute exacerbation of COPD
7.50
Acute
heart failure
1
<1
1-5
6+
16+
30+
40+
50+
60+
70+
80+
Aetiology
AHF is usually caused by a reduced cardiac output that results from a functional or structural abnormality.
De-novo
heart failure
is caused by and increased cardiac filling pressures and myocardial dysfunction usually as a result of ischaemia. This causes reduced cardiac output and therefore hypoperfusion. This, in turn can cause pulmonary oedema. Other less common causes of de-novo AHF are:
Viral myopathy
Toxins
Valve dysfunction
Decompensated heart failure accounts for most cases of AHF. The most common precipitating causes of acute AHF are:
Acute coronary syndrome
Hypertensive crisis: e.g. bilateral
renal artery stenosis
Acute arrhythmia
Valvular disease
There is generally a history of pre-existing cardiomyopathy. It usually presents with signs of fluid congestion, weight gain, orthopnoea and
breathlessness
.
Improve
Clinical features
Generally speaking, the signs and symptoms of AHF are as follows:
Symptoms
Signs
Breathlessness
Cyanosis
Reduced exercise tolerance
Tachycardia
Oedema
Elevated jugular venous pressure
Fatigue
Displaced apex beat
Chest signs: classically bibasal crackles but may also cause a wheeze
S3-heart sound
Sometimes the presentation will be that of the underlying cause (e.g: chest pain, viral infection)
Over 90% of patients with AHF have a normal or increased blood pressure (mmHg).
Improve
Investigations
The diagnostic workup for patients with AHF includes:
Blood tests - this is to look for any underlying abnormality such as anaemia, abnormal electrolytes or infection.
Chest X-ray - findings include pulmonary venous congestion, interstitial oedema and cardiomegaly
Echocardiogram - this will identify pericardial effusion and cardiac tamponade
B-type natriuretic peptide - raised levels (>100mg/litre) indicate myocardial damage and are supportive of the diagnosis.
Improve
Management
Recommended treatments for all patients
IV
loop diuretics
e.g. furosemide or bumetanide
Possible additional treatments
oxygen
this should be given in line with British Thoracic Society guidelines, i.e. keep oxygen saturations at 94-98%
vasodilators
nitrates
should not be routinely given to all patients
they may, however, have a role if concomitant myocardial ischaemia, severe hypertension or regurgitant aortic or mitral valve disease
the major side-effect/contraindication is hypotension
Patients with respiratory failure
CPAP
Patients with hypotension (e.g. < 85 mmHg)/cardiogenic shock
this can be a difficult scenario to manage
some of the treatments typically used for acute
heart failure
(e.g. loop diuretics and nitrates) may exacerbate the hypotension
inotropic agents
e.g. dobutamine
should be considered for patients with severe left ventricular dysfunction who have potentially reversible cardiogenic shock
vasopressor agents
e.g. norepinephrine
normally only used if insufficient response to inotropes and evidence of end-organ hypoperfusion
mechanical circulatory assistance
e.g. intra-aortic balloon counterpulsation or ventricular assist devices
Other treatments
opiates
NICE state 'do not routinely offer opiates to people with acute heart failure'
they were previously used routinely and help to reduce
dyspnoea
/distress in patients
however some studies have suggested increased morbidity in patients given opiates
General points
regular medication for heart failure such as beta-blockers ACE-inhibitors should be continued
beta-blockers should only be stopped if the patient has heart rate less than 50 beats per minute, second or third degree atrioventricular block, or shock
Improve
Cardiac failure
Acute heart failure