Cardiomyopathy
Cardiomyopathy
Cardiomyopathy
refers to a group of diseases that affect the myocardium, leading to impaired cardiac function. It is categorised into three main types: hypertrophic, dilated, and restrictive cardiomyopathy.
Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy
, characterised by left ventricular hypertrophy, often without an obvious cause, can lead to diastolic dysfunction and arrhythmias.
Dilated cardiomyopathy
, marked by dilation and impaired contraction of one or both ventricles, can result in systolic heart failure. Lastly,
restrictive cardiomyopathy
involves rigid ventricular walls that limit proper filling and lead to diastolic dysfunction. The pathophysiology varies greatly among these types; however, genetic mutations play a significant role in many cases. Management strategies include pharmacotherapy with beta-blockers or ACE inhibitors, device therapy such as implantable cardioverter-defibrillators (ICDs), or surgical interventions like myectomy or transplantation.
Last updated: 1
st
January 2025
Aetiology
The old classification of dilated, restricted and hypertrophic cardiomyopathy has been largely abandoned due to the high degree of overlap. The latest classification of cardiomyopathy by the WHO and American Heart Association reflect this.
The tables below shows a very limited set of exam related facts for the various cardiomyopathies:
Primary cardiomyopathies
- predominately involving the heart
Genetic
- both conditions listed below are autosomal dominant. An implantable cardioverter-defibrillator is often inserted to reduce the incidence of sudden cardiac death.
Type of cardiomyopathy
Selected points
Hypertrophic obstructive cardiomyopathy
Leading cause of sudden cardiac death in young athletes
Usually due to a mutation in the gene encoding β-myosin heavy chain protein
Common cause of sudden death
Echo findings include MR, systolic anterior motion (SAM) of the anterior mitral valve and asymmetric septal hypertrophy
Arrhythmogenic right ventricular dysplasia
Right ventricular myocardium is replaced by fatty and fibrofatty tissue
Around 50% of patients have a mutation of one of the several genes which encode components of desmosome
ECG abnormalities in V1-3, typically T wave inversion. An epsilon wave is found in about 50% of those with ARV - this is best described as a terminal notch in the QRS complex
Mixed
- rather confusingly most of the causes of dilated and restrictive cardiomyopathy are now listed separately in the 'secondary' causes. This category servers as a reminder that many patients will have a genetic predisposition to cardiomyopathy which is then triggered by the secondary process, hence the 'mixed' category
Type of cardiomyopathy
Selected causes/points
Dilated cardiomyopathy
Classic causes include
Alcohol
Coxsackie B virus
Wet beri beri
Doxorubicin
Restrictive cardiomyopathy
Classic causes include
Amyloidosis
Post-radiotherapy
Loeffler's endocarditis
Acquired
Type of cardiomyopathy
Selected points
Peripartum cardiomyopathy
Typical develops between last month of pregnancy and 5 months post-partum
More common in older women, greater parity and multiple gestations
Takotsubo cardiomyopathy
'Stress'-induced cardiomyopathy e.g. patient just found out family member dies then develops chest pain and features of heart failure
Transient, apical ballooning of the myocardium
Treatment is supportive
Secondary cardiomyopathies
- pathological myocardial involvement as part of a generalized systemic disorder
Type of cardiomyopathy
Selected causes/points
Infective
Coxsackie B virus
Chagas disease
Infiltrative
Amyloidosis
Storage
Haemochromatosis
Toxicity
Doxorubicin
Alcoholic cardiomyopathy
Inflammatory (granulomatous)
Sarcoidosis
Endocrine
Diabetes mellitus
Thyrotoxicosis
Acromegaly
Neuromuscular
Friedreich's ataxia
Duchenne-Becker muscular dystrophy
Myotonic dystrophy
Nutritional deficiencies
Beriberi (thiamine)
Autoimmune
Systemic lupus erythematosis
Improve
Cardiology
Cardiomyopathy